Exploiting Control-flow Enforcement Technology for
Sound and Precise Static Binary Disassembly
Brian Zhao, Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Andi Quinn
UC Santa Cruz, USA

arXiv:2506.09426v1 [cs.AR] 11 Jun 2025

Abstract

An extreme example of over-approximation is superset
disassembly,
as implemented in Multiverse [1], which enRewriting x86_64 binaries—whether for security hardensures
that
any
valid offset an indirect jump could target is
ing, dynamic instrumentation, or performance profiling—
treated
as
real
code. Although this guarantees correctness,
is notoriously difficult due to variable-length instructions,
the
resulting
instrumentation
often suffers from high cominterleaved code and data, and indirect jumps to arbipilation
overhead
and
spurious
execution paths. Dynamic
trary byte offsets. Existing solutions (e.g., “superset disbinary
instrumentation
systems
such as Intel Pin [16] and
assembly”) ensure soundness but incur significant overDynamoRIO
[2]
also
address
soundness
by intercepting
head and produce large rewritten binaries, especially for
instructions
at
runtime,
but
may
incur
substantial
perforon-the-fly instrumentation. This paper addresses these chalmance
penalties.
lenges by introducing the Time Variance Authority (TVA),
Recent hardware-based Control-Flow Integrity (CFI)
which leverages Intel’s Control-Flow Enforcement Techmechanisms
offer a way to limit this over-approximation.
nology (CET). By recognizing endbr64 as the only valid
Intel’s
Control-Flow
Enforcement Technology (CET) [12,
indirect jump target, TVA prunes spurious disassembly
13,
18]
uses
endbr64
instructions to denote valid indirect
paths while preserving soundness and emulates CET conjump
destinations,
thereby
making spurious transfers (e.g.,
straints on processors lacking native CET support, effecjumping
into
the
middle
of
an instruction) illegal in hardtively mitigating ROP/JOP exploits without new hardware.
In
principle,
if
a
CET-enabled
binary is rewritten, the
ware. We implement TVA by modernizing the Multiverse
rewriter
can
prune
offsets
that
do
not
begin with endbr64.
rewriter for 64-bit Linux. Our evaluation on SPEC CPU2017
Moreover,
shadow
stacks
[17]—whether
in hardware or
and real-world applications shows that TVA-guided rewritsoftware—further
mitigate
return-oriented
programming
ing achieves up to 1.3× faster instrumentation time. These
(ROP)
by
ensuring
that
return
addresses
match
their correresults underscore TVA’s feasibility as a high-performance,
sponding
call
sites.
uprobes-free alternative for robust x86_64 binary analysis
In this paper, we present the Time Variance Authority
and rewriting.
(TVA), a CET-driven rewriting framework that builds on
Multiverse and applies to both static and dynamic instru1 Introduction
mentation scenarios. By treating endbr64 as the only legitModern software ecosystems routinely rely on post-compilation imate targets of indirect jumps, TVA avoids the worst-case
code modifications for a variety of purposes: adding seexplosion in disassembly coverage while retaining fully
curity hardening to prevent advanced exploits, injecting
sound rewriting. Additionally, TVA enables software eminstrumentation for fine-grained performance profiling, or
ulation of CET constraints for processors lacking native
supporting fault isolation in closed-source environments.
CET support; in so doing, it enforces shadow stack checks
With the explosive growth of third-party libraries and
and indirect-branch validity without requiring special hardprecompiled modules, it is no longer feasible to assume
ware extensions. We implement our system as a drop-in ensource-level access for every component. As a result, bihancement over existing superset-disassembly workflows,
nary rewriting has emerged as a critical mechanism to retroleveraging Multiverse’s robust approach for code layout
fit protections and analyses into commercial-off-the-shelf
while plugging in CET logic to reduce unnecessary paths.
(COTS) software, yet performing it safely and efficiently
Our code is available at https://github.com/SlugLab/tva.
on x86_64 architectures remains an open challenge.
TVA is depicted as a group of timeline moniRewriting x86_64 binaries for security hardening, intors tasked with preventing the existence of
strumentation, or fault isolation poses significant difficulcertain timelines that are deemed too dangerties when source code is unavailable. As shown in Taous to the Multiverse.
–
ble 1, many static tools (e.g., RedFat [6], E9AFL [8]) apMarvell
ply post-compilation transformations to detect memory
errors or enable coverage-guided fuzzing, while others
To summary our contributions:
(NaCL [25], WebAssembly [14]) rely on specialized compiler toolchains to ensure sandboxing. Yet, soundness—
• CET-guided precise disassembly. TVA leverages
fully capturing all valid execution paths of an arbitrary
CET’s endbr64 instructions as unique markers of
binary—remains notoriously difficult. The primary obstavalid indirect jump targets, eliminating unnecessary
cle is that x86_64 permits variable-length instructions, indisassembly paths and preserving soundness—a key
terleaving of code and data, and indirect jumps to pracimprovement over traditional superset methods.
tically any byte offset. Such complexities typically force
• Software CET emulation. TVA enforces CET conrewriting frameworks to over-approximate the set of posstraints purely in software, enabling robust protecsible instruction boundaries, leading to bloated analysis
tion against control-flow attacks (ROP/JOP) even
times and excessive runtime overhead.
on legacy CPUs without native CET support.
1

Brian Zhao, Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Andi Quinn

• High-performance instrumentation. Evaluation
on SPEC CPU2017 demonstrates TVA’s practical
benefits, showing up to 1.3× faster instrumentation.

Figure 1 illustrates how instructions of varying lengths
are tightly packed within a binary, highlighting the necessity for accurate boundary detection during disassembly.
Existing approaches like superset disassembly attempt to
ensure correctness by analyzing every potential instruction
offset, inevitably leading to inflated runtime overhead due
to excessive coverage.
Given these challenges, a precise understanding of the
underlying Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) becomes
critical. The ISA defines every aspect of an instruction’s
representation and semantics, including opcode definitions,
operand types (registers, immediate values, or memory references), and encoding formats (prefixes, ModR/M bytes,
displacements, and immediate fields). Accurate disassembly and rewriting depend on reliably interpreting these
ISA-specified instruction details. Misinterpretation or incorrect handling at this foundational level can jeopardize
both security and correctness, emphasizing why robust
ISA-aware disassembly techniques are essential for modern static binary rewriting frameworks.
In the sections that follow, we explore how emerging
control-flow enforcement technologies like Intel’s ControlFlow Enforcement Technology (CET) influence static binary rewriting and disassembly processes, particularly by
leveraging explicit ISA-level markers to reduce ambiguity
and complexity during analysis.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first
discuss background and technical challenges (Section 2),
then present TVA’s design (Section 3) and implementation
details (Section 3.4). We evaluate our system in Section 5
and conclude in Section 7.

2

Background

This section begins with a discussion of why x86_64 machine code complicates static analysis, followed by an
overview of ROP and Intel CET. We then survey existing
disassembly and rewriting techniques, highlighting how
hardware-backed control-flow integrity (CFI) can prune
impossible paths. Finally, we present key insights from
Multiverse—a superset disassembly framework—and explain how our system builds on and refines those ideas.
2.1 Complexities of x86_64 Machine Code
Modern x86_64 processors implement a Complex Instruction Set Computing (CISC) architecture. A defining feature
of this architecture is the use of variable-length instructions, which range from as short as one byte (e.g., nop) to
as long as fifteen bytes (e.g., instructions containing multiple prefixes, ModR/M bytes, and displacement/immediate
fields). Unlike certain Reduced Instruction Set Computing
(RISC) designs such as ARM (in certain modes), x86_64
does not require instructions to be aligned to word or halfword boundaries; instead, an instruction may begin at any
arbitrary byte offset. This unaligned nature contributes significantly to the complexity faced by static disassembly
and rewriting tools.
The lack of enforced alignment allows the instruction
encoding to be highly flexible and compact. However, this
flexibility introduces considerable difficulties for static
analysis tasks, including binary instrumentation, rewriting,
and security analysis. Because each instruction is decoded
sequentially, any decoding error, however slight, can propagate throughout subsequent instructions—a phenomenon
known as disassembly drift. Such drift results when the
disassembler mistakenly interprets data bytes as instructions or misses genuine instructions entirely. Additionally,
legitimate binary code often interleaves literal data (such as
jump tables or constant pools) within instruction streams,
making the differentiation between code and data challenging based solely on byte inspection.
Moreover, the variable-length and non-aligned nature
of x86_64 instructions complicates binary patching and
rewriting. Any naive insertion or deletion of code bytes
can inadvertently shift the position of subsequent instructions. Such shifts risk corrupting instruction sequences,
overwriting essential data literals, or misaligning indirect
jump and call targets. Consequently, tools performing static
rewriting must incorporate advanced handling mechanisms
or heuristics—such as those employed in superset disassembly [1]—to maintain correctness and stability, especially when processing complex control-flow structures or
position-independent code (PIC/PIE).

2.2

ROP attacks and CET

Return-Oriented Programming (ROP) is a common exploit
technique that allows an attacker to stitch together small
code fragments (known as “gadgets”) already present in
a binary, bypassing traditional non-executable memory
protections such as DEP (Data Execution Prevention). Figure 1 shows a toy example of ROP payload steps in x86-64
assembly.
To mitigate such attacks, Intel introduced Control-Flow
Enforcement Technology (CET). CET provides hardwarebased control-flow integrity by imposing restrictions on
indirect branch targets using endbr64 instructions. Below
is a simplified example showing how inserting endbr64
at valid jump targets can prevent unwanted transfers of
control. endbr64 can also acts as a hardware label for valid
indirect jump targets. Even though CET instructions are
interpreted as no-ops on older CPUs, they provide strong
hints for static tools on where legitimate indirect jumps
may land. Consequently, a static rewriting framework can
ignore offsets that lack an endbr64 prefix, significantly
pruning disassembly paths.
2.3

Disassembly and Rewriting Techniques

Broadly, existing methods for rewriting x86_64 binaries
fall into two categories:
2.3.1 Reassemblable Disassembly. Tools like Uroboros [22],
Retrowrite [4], DDisasm [7], and Multiverse [1] translate
raw machine code into reassemblable assembly, modify it,
and then reconstruct the binary. This can preserve much
of the binary’s original structure, but the rewriting must
handle position-independent code (PIC/PIE), relocation
tables, and precise instruction boundaries.
2

Exploiting Control-flow Enforcement Technology for Sound and Precise Static Binary Disassembly

Table 1. Comparison of Related Binary Rewriting and Hardening Tools
Tool
RedFat

Approach
Application
Binary rewrit- Memory error
ing of pointers detection
(buffer overflows, UAF)
SelectiveTaint Static binary Dynamic taint
rewriting
analysis
E9AFL

Static binary
rewriting

NaCl

Custom compiler toolchain

WebAssembly Custom compiler and VM
environment

Key Strength
Detects pointer-related
errors at runtime

Limitation
Potential performance overhead
due to pointer “fatness”

Automated injection of
taint labels into rewritten code
Fuzzing with- Eliminates need for
out recompila- source code; direct intion
strumentation of binaries
Fault isolation Ensures untrusted x86
/ sandboxing
code complies with
sandbox constraints
Safe, portable High portability across
execution
platforms; reduced attack surface

Can incur high performance
overhead on large, complex binaries
May not achieve complete coverage on highly obfuscated binaries
Not purely binary-level rewriting; requires specialized compilation
Requires re-targeting / compilation to Wasm; not a postcompilation tool

Figure 1. A gadget that can be parsed from arbitrary offset.
2.3.2 Direct Rewriting / Instruction Punning. Approaches
such as Zipr [11], Egalito [23], zpoline[24], frida[3] or
e9patch [5] lift code into an intermediate representation
(IR) or create out-of-line trampolines. This strategy can
reduce disruption to the original binary’s layout but still
relies on identifying correct disassembly boundaries for
jump insertion. Moreover, advanced transformations can
be limited if the original code has deeply interwoven instructions and data.
2.4

Hardware-Accelerated CFI Mechanisms

Beyond CET, hardware support for CFI has expanded
in recent CPU generations. For example, AMD Zen3 introduces a hardware shadow stack to validate return addresses [15]. In principle, these features drastically reduce
the runtime attack surface, as only labeled entry points are
valid targets. However, to exploit these mechanisms fully
at static rewrite time, one must ensure that the rewritten
binary respects or emulates CET-style invariants. That is
exactly what our approach does: even on CPUs lacking

CET, endbr64 instructions can still serve as a filter for
feasible indirect jumps, and a software-maintained shadow
stack can mimic hardware protections against ROP.
2.5

Challenges and Insights from Multiverse

Multiverse [1] pioneered the idea of superset disassembly,
disassembling every potential offset to guarantee no valid
code path is missed. This yields a sound rewrite—any
legitimate indirect jump target is included—but at the cost
of major over-approximation. Indeed, many “instructions”
discovered in this manner are simply data bytes or offsets
that are never actually taken at runtime.
Multiverse also tackled five specific challenges:
C1 Static Memory Address Relocation. Ensuring correct relocation for instructions referencing data or
global symbols when the code layout changes.
C2 Dynamic Address Computation. Handling registerbased address arithmetic that complicates static determination of control-flow edges.

3

Brian Zhao, Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Andi Quinn

C3 Code vs. Data Differentiation. Dealing with arbitrary interleaving of code and data in x86_64 segments.
C4 Function Pointer Handling. Maintaining correct
references to function pointers that may cross module boundaries or exist in data sections.
C5 Position-Independent Code (PIC/PIE). Accounting for modern compilers and operating systems
that routinely use relative addressing and dynamic
relocation.

Finally, the mapping phase maintains a lookup structure
that associates original addresses with their rewritten counterparts. At runtime, this mapping is consulted whenever
execution might revert to code segments whose execute
permissions have been revoked, ensuring that the flow is
correctly redirected into the instrumented binary.
Like Multiverse, TVA performs these steps in two passes.
The first pass scans and collects all offsets marked for
relocation or patching and builds the mapping table. The
second pass uses that mapping to produce the final binary,
ensuring that all relative and absolute addresses remain
accurate.

To address these issues, Multiverse preserves most of the
original layout (S1) and records an old-to-new offset mapping (S2), allowing instructions or data references to be
correctly redirected. For PIC/PIE (S5), it defers to relative
addressing so the resulting code remains relocatable.

3.2

Multiverse guarantees a sound disassembly of the original
binary by iterating over every instruction offset. While this
superset disassembly ensures no code path is missed, it
can excessively inflate the number of instructions to be
examined and mapped. On modern binaries, this can lead
to significantly longer analysis and instrumentation times.

Our Key Insight. Instead of continuing to disassemble all offsets (as in S3), we observe that many modern
binaries are compiled with endbr64 instructions at legitimate indirect jump targets. By limiting disassembly to
these labeled targets, our Time Variance Authority (TVA)
framework both retains soundness (we cannot miss valid
jump targets) and greatly reduces spurious code paths.
The net effect is a faster, smaller rewrite that can also enforce CET-like semantics in software. Moreover, TVA ’s
approach to function pointers and external libraries (S4)
lets developers selectively instrument only the main binary or include libraries for a tighter security guarantee.
In either case, endbr64 becomes a foundational element
for pruning the search space, addressing many overhead
concerns that plagued traditional superset disassembly.

3

3.2.1 TVA Disassembly. TVA addresses the overhead of
superset disassembly by leveraging CET instructions. CET
dictates that indirect jumps must target endbr64, effectively labeling legal landing pads within a function. Whenever TVA encounters a direct branch, it follows it normally.
However, for indirect branches, TVA only initiates new
disassembly paths at endbr64 offsets. This strategy reduces the number of spurious offsets that might never be
legitimately branched to, thereby cutting down the total
disassembly work.
From a security standpoint, TVA also enforces CET-like
guarantees in software. If an indirect branch attempts to
jump to an offset that lacks a preceding endbr64, execution will be halted or trapped, mirroring the hardware
behavior on CET-capable CPUs.

System Design and Implementation

Our work builds on Multiverse [1], modernizing it for
64-bit x86 binaries and extending its functionality with
TVA. Multiverse’s core design remains sound, requiring
only minor changes to accommodate contemporary OS
and compiler behaviors. This section describes the overall
architecture of TVA, detailing how we have leveraged Multiverse’s existing machinery while adding a CET-driven
disassembly mode.
3.1

Disassembly

3.3

Mapping

Like Multiverse, TVA adopts a two-pass mapping strategy.
In the first pass, all potential jump targets are collected:
direct branches, endbr64 instructions, and (for call/return
semantics) the instructions immediately following a call.
The second pass synthesizes the new code sections and
writes out the final instrumented binary. Any relocated
instruction or data reference is updated to point to the new
addresses according to the collected mapping.

Overview

TVA divides the rewriting process into three major components—disassembly, rewriting, and mapping—that work
together through multiple passes to robustly transform the
original code into its instrumented form.
In the disassembly phase, TVA analyzes the binary to
identify valid instructions and feasible code paths. Instead
of enumerating every byte offset (as in Multiverse’s superset disassembly), TVA selectively follows legitimate
indirect-branch targets by scanning for endbr64 instructions, while still preserving all direct branch paths.
The rewriting phase then modifies instructions so that
they point to newly allocated code regions, thus adjusting
both direct and indirect control flow. During this stage,
TVA also inserts additional instrumentation logic—such as
shadow stack checks or software-based CET-like enforcement—to strengthen security or enable profiling.

3.3.1 TVA Mapping. In practice, TVA expands on Multiverse’s mapping logic by restricting indirect branch targets to endbr64. This ensures every valid dynamic target
is tracked. Attempts to jump to unmapped addresses in the
original code region trigger a segfault, which our runtime
mechanism intercepts and safely redirects or halts. Thus,
even CPUs without CET extensions gain a CET-like level
of control-flow validation.
3.4

Executing Lookups

A key operational difference in TVA is how it prevents
execution in the original code region. Specifically, TVA
revokes execute permissions from those pages, so any attempt to run code there results in a segfault. This ensures
4

Exploiting Control-flow Enforcement Technology for Sound and Precise Static Binary Disassembly

that the new, instrumented code is always the point of control flow, even for external libraries returning into what
would normally be the original text section.

lookup :
push rbx
mov rbx , r a x
l e a rax , [ r i p + lookup − { l o o k u p _ o f f s e t }]
add rbx , { s e l f . c o n t e x t . newbase − b a s e }
s u b rbx , r a x
jb outside
cmp rbx , { s i z e }
jae outside
mov ebx , [ r a x + r b x * 4+{ m a p p i n g _ o f f s e t } ]
cmp ebx , 0 x f f f f f f f f
je failure
add r a x , r b x
pop r b x
ret
outside :
add rbx , r a x
s u b rbx , { s e l f . c o n t e x t . newbase − b a s e }
mov r a x , r b x
mov rbx , [ 0 x56780008 ]
xchg rbx , [ r s p ]
add r s p , 8
jmp [ r s p − 8 ]
failure :
hlt

3.4.1 Handling Segfaults. For uninstrumented libraries,
such as libc, the system initially follows Multiverse’s design of attempting to map the call address, then the return
address if necessary. In some scenarios, the original address might get used on return, which previously risked
resuming execution in the old code. With execute permissions removed, such a return now triggers a segfault. Our
segfault handler can then capture the offending address and
consult the mapping table to find the correct instrumented
address. Execution resumes safely in the rewritten code,
maintaining consistent control-flow tracking and preventing any reversion to the original, uninstrumented regions.
This mechanism allows TVA to function seamlessly
alongside legacy binaries and system libraries, bridging
gaps where full-library instrumentation might not be feasible or desirable. By relying on the segfault-based redirection, we minimize risk while still maintaining robust
instrumentation for the main application code.
Rather than proactively remapping the return address
(as Multiverse originally did), we now allow it to remain
unchanged. Upon return, the process will segfault if it
attempts to use the original address, at which point we
can remap it on demand. This preserves the original return
address for any external library logic that relies on it, while
still ensuring that execution ultimately transitions back into
our instrumented code.

Figure 2. Local lookup function

TVA return addresses. Because we rely on segfaults
to remap control flow from returning from functions we
need those to be valid map locations. This means that
we, unfortunately, need to relax valid mapping from just
the endbr64 instructions that a normal CET processor
would allow and include instructions directly after a call
instruction as well. However, with a better implementation
of a shadow stack we can also mitigate this issue as well.

mean that if we try to execute in the original code section,
the program will now segfault. In case that was not the
intended behaviour, we add a segfault handler which calls
the mapping function to get us back to the new code section
to allow the program to finish running.
The process for looking up the new address for an original address is done in up to three stages. First a local lookup
is done, if it succeeds then we return immediately. Otherwise the local lookup defers to a global lookup, which
checks for the appropriate local lookup function to call and
passes it along. Finally it reaches the proper local lookup
function which will handle the translation before returning.
This overall process is the same between Multiverse and
TVA.

3.4.2 Mapping Functions. The address resolution itself
is done in two stages. First a local mapping is used to check
if, and translate if it is, an address is in the original code
area of the current binary. If it is then we use Multiverse’s
constant time lookup to determine the new offset. If the
offset is 0xffffffff then we deem it as illegal and exit.
Otherwise, the address will be outside the current mapped
region and we need to consult the global mapping in order
to determine if the correct mapping function to use, and
tail call into it.
The implementation of the mapping functions has deviated slightly to conform to generated code becoming
position independent by nature of the widespread introduction of ASLR. Instead of having special cases for PIC, the
default is to use RIP relative offsets to get the correct base
address to determine code regions.

Local Lookup. In Figure 2 we see the assembly for
executing First it calculates the base address of where the
program is loaded. The it gets the offset from the base that
the address to be translated is at. If that address is outside
the range, either it is at a negative offset or it is at an offset
greater than the original size of the program, then we defer
to the global lookup. Otherwise we use our mapping as a
lookup table in order to do a constant time translation. If
the offset is 0xffffffff then we deem it as illegal and
halt the program. Otherwise we add it to the base address
before returning it.
The implementation of the mapping functions has changed
slightly from Multiverse’s original form because most code
is position independent code (PIC) by nature of the widespread introduction of ASLR. Instead of having special

3.4.3 Executing Lookups. As we discussed in the last
section, with a mapping in place we need some way to
handle the actual translation of original addresses into
new addresses. This is the job of the lookup function. As
discussed in the section on fixing Multiverse, we removed
execute permissions from the original code pages. This
5

Brian Zhao, Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Andi Quinn

passed in on the rbx register and we’ll see it when we look
at how we rewrite call and return instructions.

glookup :
...
mov r c x , 0 x56780000
mov rbx , [ r c x ]
x o r rdx , r d x
searchloop :
cmp rbx , r d x
je failure
add r c x , 24
mov r10 , [ r c x + 8 ]
neg r 1 0
add r10 , r a x
cmp r10 , [ r c x + 1 6 ]
j l e success
inc rdx
jmp s e a r c h l o o p
success :
...
external :
pop r 1 0
pop r d x
pop r b x
pop r c x
t e s t rbx , r b x
jz skip
mov [ r s p − 6 4 ] , r a x
mov r a x , [ r s p + 8 ]
c a l l glookup
mov [ r s p + 8 ] , r a x
mov r a x , [ r s p − 6 4 ]
skip :
ret
failure :
hlt

3.5

Rewriting

The tactics by which we rewrite control flow remain the
same as Multiverse.
For direct control flow, once we have a mapping we can
immediately replace the offsets with the correct mapping.
Branches are padded to be 4 bytes in case they were assembled to only have a 1 byte immediate value, so that we
stay in sync with the mapping.
Indirect branches are rewritten to use the mapping functions in order to translate from the old address to the new
address.
mov [ r s p − 6 4 ] , r a x
mov [ r s p − 7 2 ] , r b x
mov r a x , t a r g e t
mov rbx , i s j m p
c a l l lookup
mov [ r s p − 8 ] , r a x
mov r a x , [ r s p − 6 4 ]
mov rbx , [ r s p − 7 2 ]
jmp [ r s p − 8 ]
Here we match Multiverse’s method with an added rbx
store to use it to pass in whether the instruction is a call
or not. In this case we will indicate that it is an indirect
jump so that the mapping function will not try to remap
the return address if we are going into an external address.
3.5.1 Calls. On the other hand an indirect call will have
a slightly longer variant to determine the return address
is calculated with a lea. It is done this way because we
are now dealing with PIC, so we cannot know the correct
value for the return address at instrumentation time as we
do not know where it will be loaded.
mov [ r s p − 6 4 ] , r a x
mov [ r s p − 7 2 ] , r b x
mov r a x , t a r g e t
mov rbx , i s j m p
push rbx
l e a rbx , r e t u r n _ a d d r e s s
xchg rbx , [ r s p ]
c a l l lookup
mov [ r s p − 8 ] , r a x
mov r a x , [ r s p − 5 6 ]
mov rbx , [ r s p − 6 4 ]
jmp [ r s p − 8 ]

Figure 3. Global lookup function

cases for PIC, the default is to use the offset from the base
of where the program was loaded. This vastly reduces the
complexity of having to handle different types of instrumentation differently.
Global Lookup. In Figure 3 we see the assembly for
the global lookup. The preamble for the global lookup includes storing a whole slew of registers that we’ll need. We
have to do this because there’s no concept of caller saved
registers because we don’t do analysis on what registers the
program actually uses. Then we have a loop for searching
for the proper mapping region. When we find the region
that corresponds to the address we’re mapping, we can call
the corresponding lookup function, here stored in rcx on
line 21. If the look up function is not null then we use the
mapped value from the lookup function. If the lookup function is null, then there is no lookup function and therefore
it’s an external lib. In the case of external libs we have to
determine if we need to remap the return address, which
is at a known offset on the stack. This determination is

We restore rax from rsp-56 instead of rsp-64 because
we pushed the return address. And similarly for rbx.
3.5.2 Return. Because we push the original code address
for the return address, we need to remap that before we
return.
mov [ r s p − 5 6 ] , r a x
pop r a x
push rbx
mov rbx , 0
c a l l $+%s
6

Exploiting Control-flow Enforcement Technology for Sound and Precise Static Binary Disassembly

pop
mov
mov
jmp

rbx
[ rsp −8] , rax
rax , [ rsp −56]
[ rsp −8]

from high overhead due to breakpoints, context switching,
and frequent kernel intervention—particularly detrimental
in real-time or high-throughput systems. By contrast, our
framework reduces or eliminates these sources of overhead
by injecting analysis code directly into the binary. Whether
performed offline (static rewriting) or applied dynamically,
this embedding avoids kernel-level traps and consolidates
instrumentation logic into a single, self-contained executable. As a result, developers can achieve lower-latency
tracing that remains easy to deploy: there is no need for
specialized kernel modules or repeated probe registration.
The final executable transparently includes all necessary
trace hooks, allowing for predictable performance even
under demanding workloads.

Here we store away rax before grabbing the return address and setting rbx to remind the mapping functions that
we are not a call, so that it does not try to remap something
as the return address when it determines that we are going
to an external address. Once we get the mapped return
address we just need to restore our registers and then we
can jump.
Together, these changes allow TVA to manage the intricacies of 64-bit binary analysis and rewriting while preserving compatibility with modern Linux environments.
By adapting the disassembly engine, addressing modes,
and calling conventions, TVA can confidently handle large,
complex binaries without losing soundness or precision.
3.6

4.2 Software CET Emulation
Although recent hardware features (e.g., Intel CET or
AMD’s Shadow Stack) offer built-in safeguards against
control-flow attacks such as Return-Oriented Programming
(ROP) and Jump/Call-Oriented Programming (JOP), many
deployed systems lack these capabilities. Rather than requiring specific processors, our approach enforces CETlike semantics entirely in software, providing two main
defenses for legacy binaries and virtualized environments.
shadow stack protection preserves return-address integrity by instrumenting every call and return instruction. When a function call is invoked, the return address is
pushed both onto the standard stack and onto a separate,
software-maintained shadow stack. At return, these two
addresses are compared; execution continues only if they
match. If not, the process is halted, thwarting ROP-style
attempts to corrupt the return address. While hardware
shadow stacks on newer CPUs perform a similar check in
a protected memory region, our software approach makes
this defense available on any commodity x86_64 processor.
indirect branch validation emulates the CET requirement that indirect jumps or calls must land on a specially
labeled target (endbr64). Upon any indirect control transfer, our system checks whether the destination offset corresponds to a valid endbr64 site in the instrumented code. If
it does not, execution is blocked. This design ensures that
attackers cannot redirect control flow into mid-instruction
bytes or other unintended regions, mirroring the hardwareenforced checks on CET-enabled CPUs.
Together, these two protections address the main pillars
of CET without relying on specialized hardware. By rewriting a binary to insert endbr64 markers and shadow stack
instrumentation, our framework can detect both invalid
return addresses and illegal branch targets. In practice, the
added runtime overhead is modest, and developers can
seamlessly retrofit these defenses into existing binaries or
libraries. This software-based CET emulation thus offers
broad compatibility and a compelling security advantage,
especially in legacy or virtualized deployments where hardware CET is not yet available.

CET

For CET-enabled binaries Multiverse can, in theory, support, without modifications to the framework, an instrumentation pass that gives the resulting binary CET enforcement
in software, if you have a non-supporting CPU. The insight
of TVA is to use CET instructions to augment the disassembly process. Since we know that the execution expects
to use the enforced semantics of CET instructions we can
limit the disassembly to only start from CET indirect jump
target instruction, endbr64.
3.7

Address Map Size

The other change is for execution, since we know the only
places we’ll be doing an indirect jump to is an indirect jump
target, that’s the only things that we’ll need to add to our
mapping are the indirect jump targets. Direct jump targets
don’t need to be mapped because the instrumentation step
puts in the offsets for those, so we can omit the mappings
for those. The end result is we reduce the disassembled
instruction count while improving the security properties
of the final binary.

4

Use Cases

Our framework enables high-value instrumentation and
security features in settings that typically require specialized hardware or kernel-level support. In this section, we
illustrate two representative applications: lightweight tracing and analysis[21], and software-based enforcement of
CET-like semantics[19]. By instrumenting binaries either
offline or at runtime, developers can achieve lower overhead than traditional kernel-level tracing methods, while
still benefiting from control-flow protections that typically
require modern CPU features. In legacy or virtualized environments lacking dedicated CET hardware, our approach
provides a transparent way to retrofit security and observability into existing applications.
4.1

Lightweight Tracing and Analysis

4.3

Profiling or debugging complex software often relies on
tracing frameworks that intercept function boundaries or
specific code locations at runtime. While these approaches
(e.g., perf, uprobe[26]) excel at flexibility, they can suffer

Replacing DBI

Dynamic binary instrumentation (DBI) frameworks[10,
20] such as DynamoRIO [2] provide a powerful mechanism to insert analysis or security checks during runtime.
7

Brian Zhao, Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Andi Quinn

5

Seconds

1000
750
500
250
0

mcf xalancbmk x264 deepsjeng leela

xz

552x

20x
35x

30x
46x

10x
15x

40x
67x

mcf xalancbmk x264 deepsjeng leela

2x
2x

tva
mv
base

284x

500
400
300
200
100
0

4x
6x

Normalized Scores (base=1)

Figure 4. Runtime comparison for TVA, MV, and uninstrumented on CPU2017

xz specrand

14.2x
mcf xalancbmk x264 deepsjeng leela

2.0x
4.0x

1.4x
1.0x

2.1x
2.1x

1.7x

3.0x
2.6x

tva
dr
base

5.3x
1.7x

12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0

1.2x
1.6x

Normalized Scores (base=1)

Figure 5. Compile time comparison for TVA, MV, and
uninstrumented on CPU2017

xz specrand

1.0

tva
dr
base

1.3x
1.2x

1.3x
1.1x

1.6x
1.5x

1.4x
1.4x

1.4x

1.2x
1.4x

1.7x

1.5

1.3x

2.0

2.1x

Figure 6. Runtime comparison for TVA, Null tool DynamoRIO, and uninstrumented on CPU2017

0.5

Evaluation

0.0

This section presents our evaluation of the TVA prototype.
We implement the 2 case studies on TVA. We answer the
following questions:
• How does TVA’s performance overhead compare to
Multiverse?
• Why does TVA impose lower runtime overhead than
existing tools, i.e., from where does the system’s
performance advantage arise?
• How TVA can be useful in rewriting that prior work
is not working? What’s the killer application for
TVA?
5.1

tva
mv
base

1250

Normalized Instructions (base=1)

They work by intercepting execution and translating basic blocks on the fly, typically caching instrumented code
fragments in a code cache. While flexible, DBI approaches
carry several drawbacks that TVA (and static rewriting in
general) can overcome:
DBI frameworks must maintain a code cache and translation engine, leading to significant overhead in CPU- and
memory-intensive workloads. In contrast, TVA ’s static
rewriting integrates instrumentation directly into the binary,
eliminating the need for repeated runtime translations. As
our evaluation shows, this reduces runtime slowdown and
is crucial for latency-sensitive or large-scale workloads
such as HPC or high-throughput servers. While there is
some slowdown in Figure 6, we achieve a 10x speedup in
memtrace. Compared to the null tool performance, we find
that the instrumentation overhead and calling into external
C/C++ code is very expensive [9].
Because DBI tools modify code streams at runtime, they
can introduce jitter, causing variable execution times as
new paths are discovered and translated. For real-time
or time-critical applications, this unpredictability can be
unacceptable. By applying instrumentation offline, TVA
ensures that the resulting executable maintains uniform
behavior with stable timing characteristics.
Dynamically instrumented programs often rely on hooking into system loaders or attaching to processes via debuggers, requiring specific runtime privileges such as LD_PRELOAD
usage or container permissions that may be restricted in
production or sandboxed environments. In contrast, TVA
produces a fully self-contained rewritten binary that can
be deployed like a normal executable, with no special privileges or environment variables required.
DBI frameworks also impose a substantial memory overhead to maintain the code cache, analysis data structures,
and runtime instrumentation logic. By adopting a static
rewriting approach, TVA achieves a memory footprint
comparable to the original binary, with only a minimal
overhead for instrumentation stubs. This efficiency is particularly valuable in resource-constrained environments
or large-scale servers, where additional memory usage is
costly.

mcf xalancbmk x264 deepsjeng leela

xz specrand

Figure 7. Instruction Count comparison for TVA, Null tool
DynamoRIO, and uninstrumented on CPU2017
number listed below is the average of 10 trials. We report
averages using geometric mean when that is appropriate.
5.2 Benchmarks
While our evaluation centers on SPEC2017, there are certain workloads we cannot handle due to assumptions inherent in our approach. Specifically, our tool does not
support self-modifying executables, ruling out the gcc
benchmark in SPEC2017, which changes its own code
at runtime. Other workloads also pose unique challenges:
perlbench triggers failures when destructors attempt to
call into code sections not recognized by our rewriter,

Experimental Setup

We evaluate TVA running on a dual-socket AMD EPYC
7452 (32 cores, 64 SMT 2.35 GHz, 128 MB LLC) with
256 GB DDR4 memory. Unless otherwise mentioned, each
8

libm.so

3.8x

3.9x

Normalized size (base=1)

5
4
3
2
1
0

5.2x

Exploiting Control-flow Enforcement Technology for Sound and Precise Static Binary Disassembly

libgcc_s.so

For each benchmark, the tva (red bars) and mv (blue
bars) bars measure the runtime of the statically-instrumented
binaries, while the base (green bars) corresponds to the
uninstrumented executable. As expected, both instrumented
configurations incur an overhead above the baseline. However, tva consistently exhibits lower or comparable overhead when compared to mv.
In benchmarks like 505.mcf_r4 and 531.deepsjeng_r4,
we observe a moderate increase in runtime over base,
largely due to additional control-flow checks. On other,
more complex benchmarks such as 523.xalancbmk_r4 and
525.x264_r4, the overhead becomes more pronounced, yet
tva’s runtime still slightly outperforms that of mv. This improvement arises because tva avoids over-disassembly by
leveraging endbr64 instructions, thus reducing the amount
of code that needs to be instrumented.

tva
base

libstdc++.so

Figure 8. Library size comparison for TVA

omnetpp references addresses in libgcc that remain unmapped after rewriting, and leela implicitly depends on
libm in ways that complicate static analysis. These issues
highlight a broader limitation of static instrumentation
when confronted with dynamic or low-level runtime behaviors.
5.3

5.5

Below, we highlight two main considerations: (1) whether
to instrument external libraries, and (2) avoiding unnecessary address translations at runtime.

Instrumentation

In figure 5 we compare the usage of Multiverse and TVA.
While we can disassemble and instrument any binary with
multiverse and any binary with CET-enabled with TVA,
we can only instrument the original binary. If the binary is
self-modifying, where it changes code in the original code
region, then the instrumented execution will be different
from the original as the instrumented execution will not
reflect any of those modifications. If the program relies on
JIT and it stores the resulting instructions outside the original code area, that will be executed but not instrumented
at all.
The instrumentation time metric was measured by running the two systems with a null instrumentor, where
there is no added instrumentation. We are able to see 30%
speedups with TVA over Multiverse. Instrumentation time
with the null instrumentor is linear with number of instructions that need to be disassembled and reassembled.
Therefore we see that TVA is able to prune a third of the
potential instructions that Multiverse otherwise tries to
disassemble.
5.4

Performance Optimization

Instrumenting vs. Ignoring Shared Libraries. A fundamental trade-off in TVA is whether to apply rewriting to
shared libraries in addition to the main executable. Instrumenting these libraries can improve security coverage (and,
in some instrumentation scenarios, increase observability),
because every indirect call within library code also becomes constrained by CET-like checks. However, this may
significantly increase overall rewriting time (especially for
large libraries) and inflate the size of the final instrumented
binaries.
By contrast, ignoring libraries—rewriting only the main
executable—leads to faster instrumentation (often by up
to 30–40% in our experiments) and keeps final binary
sizes closer to the uninstrumented baseline. The trade-off
is that any indirect calls within library code remain uninstrumented. As a safeguard, TVA still revokes execute permissions for the original (baseline) code pages of the main
binary, so returns from library code into old addresses trigger a segfault (see Section 3.4). At that point, the segfault
handler looks up the correct rewritten address and resumes
execution in the instrumented code. In practice, we find
that this “on-demand” mapping does not add noticeable
runtime overhead for most SPEC CPU2017 benchmarks,
as shown in Figure 4.

Performance Overhead

Looking at Table 2 we can see how TVA and Multiverse
compare on increasing memory footprint. We see that TVA
uses almost half the new text size as Multiverse does. That
is the only place that we currently see savings, though
it’s possible that future work may be able to find more
space savings by condensing the mapping used to translate
addresses.
With Table 3 we see the counts of various types of
instructions that are being instrumented. Across the board,
we see huge decreases in total instructions disassembled
as well as in very expensive categories, like indirect calls
and jumps.
Figure 4 shows the execution times of the SPEC CPU2017
benchmarks under three different configurations: our proposed tool (tva), the original Multiverse (mv), and an uninstrumented baseline (base). These benchmarks include
505.mcf_r4, 523.xalancbmk_r4, 525.x264_r4, 531.deepsjeng_r4, 541.leela_r4, and 557.xz_r4.

Segfault-Based Boundary Handling. When TVA does
not instrument libraries, any library-to-executable returns
(or callbacks) may still contain the original return address
in the call stack. Because TVA marks the original code
pages as non-executable, attempts to jump there cause a
segfault. Our segfault handler consults TVA’s mapping to
translate the old address into the new, instrumented offset.
We found that for typical applications, these segfaults are
rare enough in practice that the overall performance impact
is minimal. This approach also simplifies deployment by
avoiding the need to statically link large libraries or create
fully instrumented versions of them.
Minimizing Address-Translation Calls. Another optimization is to reduce the number of address translations
(i.e., calls to lookup() or similar stubs) at runtime. TVA
9

Brian Zhao, Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Andi Quinn

Binary
mcf
xalancbmk
x264
deepsjeng
leela
xz

Binary
mcf
xalancbmk
x264
deepsjeng
leela
xz

Original
New
Text Size
File Size Text Size
File Size
TVA
19673
125128
106001
280800
MV
19673
125112
194775
369568
TVA 4711945 79367160 26689195 106105328
MV 4708409 79362016 46684765 126096800
560673
3330528
2910577
6292608
TVA
MV
560401
3330416
5333702
8715728
82697
451520
432902
935376
TVA
MV
82585
451488
795836
1298304
TVA
218421
4596272
1165596
5813344
MV
218421
4596256
2068784
6716528
TVA
144197
992824
768822
1812032
MV
143541
992560
1379073
2422288
Table 2. Size before and after instrumentation

Instrumenter

Instrumenter
TVA
MV
TVA
MV
TVA
MV
TVA
MV
TVA
MV
TVA
MV

Direct
Indirect
Call
Jump
Call Jump
9584
304
276
62
42
36428
372
404
160
120
2267916 139268 101438 59606
4280
8662788 159688 120076 71640 27782
262466
6236
6166
1136
172
1044136
9628
9234
2218
1878
38492
1620
1436
4
68
151670
2110
1852
110
548
96010
7778
3862
8
156
389932
9266
4970
378
1222
70574
3010
2540
150
126
264152
4094
3380
328
806
Table 3. Instructions Instrumented

Instructions

already prunes indirect jumps that cannot legally occur
(due to CET’s endbr64 markers), but it can further minimize translation overhead by caching translation results
for frequently used function pointers. If the binary makes
heavy use of function pointer arrays or virtual calls (as in
C++), memoizing their rewritten destinations can reduce
repeated lookups. Our prototype implementation currently
uses a simple hash-based cache; in future work, more sophisticated caching heuristics (e.g., hardware-assisted or
kernel-based caching) could further improve performance.

instrumentation code was inserted directly into original
binary locations. However, such in-place patching imposes
severe constraints on available space and can unintentionally overwrite embedded data. Subsequent approaches introduced table-driven solutions or symbolization to achieve
a more robust and flexible rewriting [4, 7, 23]. Despite
these advances, disassembly and pointer identification inaccuracies remain significant challenges in the presence of
highly optimized or obfuscated x86-64 binaries.
To address these limitations, Kim et al. [12] propose
SURI, a framework for sound reassembly of modern x8664 binaries. Unlike prior solutions that often rely on ad-hoc
disassembly heuristics, SURI constructs superset CFGs:
it recursively follows direct branches and statically analyzes jump tables to over-approximate potential indirect
branch targets. SURI also performs backward slicing for
each indirect branch (e.g., jmp rdx) to discover symbolic
expressions indicating possible jump-table addresses. By
continuously applying dataflow analysis whenever new
indirect edges appear, SURI ensures that no valid controlflow paths are missed. As a result, SURI significantly
improves the soundness of reassembly, particularly for
position-independent and Control-Flow Enforcement Technology (CET)-enabled binaries [12]. However, they are not
sound since they do not make the target binary think they
are not instrumented.

Impact on Instrumentation Time and Binary Size. Ignoring libraries yields a 1.2×–1.3× faster instrumentation
phase on average, but leads to a 10–15% chance of ondemand segfaults whenever external code returns to the
original code region. For workloads that repeatedly cross
from the main binary into library functions (and back),
instrumenting libraries can amortize segfault overhead at
runtime. However, if those library functions are large and
seldom rely on indirect calls, rewriting them can inflate the
final binary size by 1.5×–2× (see Figure 8).

6

Conditional
Jump
900
1884
165850
435402
16330
43538
4192
7274
8380
20126
6012
13378

Related Work

Binary reassembly and rewriting have received considerable attention from both academia and industry. Early
techniques employed patch-based modifications, wherein
10

Exploiting Control-flow Enforcement Technology for Sound and Precise Static Binary Disassembly

7

Conclusion

[14] Matthew Kolosick, Shravan Narayan, Evan Johnson, Conrad Watt,
Michael LeMay, Deepak Garg, Ranjit Jhala, and Deian Stefan.
2022. Isolation without taxation: near-zero-cost transitions for
WebAssembly and SFI. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming
Languages 6, POPL (2022), 1–30.
[15] Michael Larabel. [n. d.]. Intel’s Linux Shadow Stack Patches Should
Work Fine With AMD CPUs. https://www.phoronix.com/news/
Shadow-Stacks-Linux-AMD.
[16] Chi-Keung Luk, Robert Cohn, Robert Muth, Harish Patil, Artur
Klauser, Geoff Lowney, Steven Wallace, Vijay Janapa Reddi, and
Kim Hazelwood. 2005. Pin: building customized program analysis
tools with dynamic instrumentation. Acm sigplan notices 40, 6
(2005), 190–200.
[17] Vedvyas Shanbhogue, Deepak Gupta, and Ravi Sahita. 2019. Security Analysis of Processor Instruction Set Architecture for Enforcing Control-Flow Integrity. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Workshop on Hardware and Architectural Support for Security
and Privacy (Phoenix, AZ, USA) (HASP ’19). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 8, 11 pages.

We presented a 64-bit extension of Multiverse that preserves the strengths of superset disassembly while integrating with Intel CET to limit indirect jumps to endbr64
targets. By leveraging hardware labels (or their software
equivalents for non-CET CPUs), our framework eliminates
many spurious paths in the rewriting process, reducing
instrumentation overhead and maintaining strong controlflow integrity guarantees. Across SPEC CPU2017 and
real-world applications, we demonstrated up to a 1.3×
improvement in instrumentation speed, a 2% runtime overhead reduction. These results highlight the power of CETguided analysis for efficient, sound binary rewriting. Future work may extend this methodology to other ISAs or
further explore how CET-like annotations can streamline
additional security and performance optimizations.

https://doi.org/10.1145/3337167.3337175

[18] Intel teams. [n. d.]. Control Flow Enforcement Technology
(CET). https://www.intel.com/content/dam/develop/external/us/
en/documents/catc17-introduction-intel-cet-844137.pdf.
[19] Mateus Tymburibá, Hugo Arúajo de Sousa, and Fernando
Magno Quintao Pereira. 2019. Multilayer rop protection via microarchitectural units available in commodity hardware. In 2019
49th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable
Systems and Networks (DSN). IEEE, 315–327.
[20] Oreste Villa, Mark Stephenson, David Nellans, and Stephen W
Keckler. 2019. Nvbit: A dynamic binary instrumentation framework
for nvidia gpus. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture. 372–383.
[21] Chenxi Wang, Haoran Ma, Shi Liu, Yifan Qiao, Jonathan Eyolfson, Christian Navasca, Shan Lu, and Guoqing Harry Xu. 2022.
{MemLiner}: Lining up Tracing and Application for a {FarMemory-Friendly} Runtime. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22). 35–53.
[22] Shuai Wang, Pei Wang, and Dinghao Wu. 2016. Uroboros: Instrumenting stripped binaries with static reassembling. In 2016 IEEE
23rd International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and
Reengineering (SANER), Vol. 1. IEEE, 236–247.
[23] David Williams-King, Hidenori Kobayashi, Kent Williams-King,
Graham Patterson, Frank Spano, Yu Jian Wu, Junfeng Yang, and
Vasileios P Kemerlis. 2020. Egalito: Layout-agnostic binary recompilation. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems. 133–147.
[24] Kenichi Yasukata, Hajime Tazaki, Pierre-Louis Aublin, and Kenta
Ishiguro. 2023. zpoline: a system call hook mechanism based on
binary rewriting. In 2023 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 23). 293–300.
[25] Bennet Yee, David Sehr, Gregory Dardyk, J Bradley Chen, Robert
Muth, Tavis Ormandy, Shiki Okasaka, Neha Narula, and Nicholas
Fullagar. 2010. Native client: A sandbox for portable, untrusted
x86 native code. Commun. ACM 53, 1 (2010), 91–99.
[26] Yusheng Zheng, Tong Yu, Yiwei Yang, Yanpeng Hu, XiaoZheng
Lai, and Andrew Quinn. 2023. bpftime: userspace eBPF Runtime
for Uprobe, Syscall and Kernel-User Interactions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.07923 (2023).

References
[1] Erick Bauman, Zhiqiang Lin, Kevin W Hamlen, et al. 2018. Superset Disassembly: Statically Rewriting x86 Binaries Without
Heuristics.. In NDSS.
[2] Derek Bruening, Timothy Garnett, and Saman Amarasinghe. 2003.
An infrastructure for adaptive dynamic optimization. In International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization, 2003.
CGO 2003. IEEE, 265–275.
[3] Daniele Cono D’Elia, Emilio Coppa, Simone Nicchi, Federico
Palmaro, and Lorenzo Cavallaro. 2019. SoK: Using dynamic binary
instrumentation for security (and how you may get caught red
handed). In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Asia Conference on
Computer and Communications Security. 15–27.
[4] Sushant Dinesh, Nathan Burow, Dongyan Xu, and Mathias Payer.
2020. Retrowrite: Statically instrumenting cots binaries for fuzzing
and sanitization. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP). IEEE, 1497–1511.
[5] Gregory J Duck, Xiang Gao, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2020. Binary rewriting without control flow recovery. In Proceedings of the
41st ACM SIGPLAN conference on programming language design
and implementation. 151–163.
[6] Gregory J Duck, Yuntong Zhang, and Roland HC Yap. 2022. Hardening binaries against more memory errors. In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth European Conference on Computer Systems. 117–131.
[7] Antonio Flores-Montoya and Eric Schulte. 2020. Datalog disassembly. In 29th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
20). 1075–1092.
[8] Xiang Gao, Gregory J Duck, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2021.
Scalable fuzzing of program binaries with E9AFL. In 2021 36th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 1247–1251.
[9] Google Group. 2012. Memtrace is slow. https://groups.google.com/
g/dynamorio-users/c/JWEDu0loQ_0/m/KHcQzBjKEv8J?pli=1.
[10] Qi Guo, Tianshi Chen, Yunji Chen, and Franz Franchetti. 2015.
Accelerating architectural simulation via statistical techniques: A
survey. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits and Systems 35, 3 (2015), 433–446.
[11] William H Hawkins, Jason D Hiser, Michele Co, Anh NguyenTuong, and Jack W Davidson. 2017. Zipr: Efficient static binary
rewriting for security. In 2017 47th Annual IEEE/IFIP International
Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN). IEEE,
559–566.
[12] Hyungseok Kim, Soomin Kim, and Sang Kil Cha. 2025. Towards
Sound Reassembly of Modern x86-64 Binaries. In Proceedings
of the 30th International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’25).
[13] Hyungseok Kim, Junoh Lee, Soomin Kim, Seungil Jung, and
Sang Kil Cha. 2022. How’d Security Benefit Reverse Engineers?:
The Implication of Intel CET on Function Identification. In 2022
52nd Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable
Systems and Networks (DSN). IEEE, 559–566.
11

