Kops: Safely Extending the eBPF Compilation Pipeline
with Native Operations
Yusheng Zheng1∗ , Zhengjie Ji2∗ , Weichen Tao3 , Hao Sun4 , Wei Zhang5 , Dan Williams2 , Andi Quinn1
1 UC Santa Cruz

2 Virginia Tech

3 Telecom Paris

arXiv:2606.24213v1 [cs.OS] 23 Jun 2026

5 University of Connecticut

safety comes from a compilation pipeline that verifies every program before execution. A userspace compiler lowers
each program to eBPF bytecode, which the in-kernel verifier checks for safety properties such as memory safety and
termination. The kernel’s just-in-time compiler (the kernel
JIT) then translates the verified bytecode to native code. The
kernel keeps the JIT simple to stay trustworthy, translating
one bytecode instruction at a time in a single pass.
This single-pass design, however, is where eBPF loses
performance. Because the JIT processes each instruction in
isolation, it cannot recognize multi-instruction patterns or
apply cross-instruction optimizations. The same C code runs
up to twice as slow through the pipeline as when compiled
directly to native code (§3). An optimizing compiler fed the
same verified bytecode recovers most of the gap, confirming
that the loss comes from the kernel JIT’s per-opcode code
generation.
Existing optimization work stays in userspace because
adding optimizations to the kernel JIT is hard. First, any
change requires upstream acceptance and a long release cycle. Second, enlarging the JIT enlarges the trusted computing
base (TCB), because the verifier checks only the bytecode
and cannot verify the native code the JIT emits. Third, native
code is architecture-specific, so a larger JIT grows the perarchitecture kernel code. The verifier and the JIT carry years
of analysis and formal verification [23, 27], so any kernel
change must stay small. Existing optimization work therefore stays in userspace: dedicated eBPF optimizers such as
Merlin [19], K2 [30], and EPSO [33] rewrite programs within
the eBPF instruction set, but cannot emit native instructions
the instruction set lacks.
We present Kops, an extension interface that lets userspace
compilers and kernel modules introduce new operations
without modifying the kernel core. Our key idea is to give
each operation two forms, a proof sequence of vanilla eBPF instructions that the existing verifier checks, and a native emit
of machine instructions that the JIT compiles. A compiletime recognizer rewrites programs to use the new operations.
The verifier re-checks the proof sequence on every load. Because the verifier checks the proof sequence, the native emit
is the only per-operation addition to the TCB. Neither the
recognizer nor the proof sequence is part of the TCB, so a
recognizer bug cannot make a verified program unsafe.
Hardware idioms are the lowest-hanging fruit for this
interface. These are operations such as rotate, conditional
select, and bit extract that CPUs execute as single native

Abstract
eBPF safely extends OS kernels in domains such as networking, observability, and security. The safety comes from an
in-kernel compilation pipeline where a verifier checks every
program, and a kernel just-in-time compiler (JIT) translates
the verified bytecode to native code. The kernel keeps the JIT
simple to stay trustworthy, translating one bytecode instruction at a time in a single pass. This single-pass design misses
optimization opportunities, so eBPF runs up to twice as slow
as natively compiled code in our characterization. Adding
optimizations to the kernel JIT directly requires upstream
acceptance and a long release cycle, enlarges the trusted computing base (TCB), and grows the per-architecture kernel
code.
To address this, we present Kops, an extension interface
that lets userspace compilers and kernel modules introduce
new operations without modifying the kernel core, while
keeping a minimal trusted computing base (TCB). Each operation has two forms, a proof sequence of vanilla eBPF instructions that the existing verifier checks and a native emit
of machine instructions that the JIT compiles. Because the
verifier checks the proof sequence, the native emit is the only
per-operation addition to the TCB. Hardware idioms are the
lowest-hanging fruit for this interface. With Kops, we build
EInsn, seven operations such as rotate and conditional select
that CPUs execute as single instructions. Lean 4 proofs show
that each native emit computes the same result as its proof
sequence. On x86-64 and ARM64, EInsn speeds up eBPF microbenchmarks by up to 24% and production applications by
up to 12%. The same interface also supports whole-program
native replacement, reaching 2.358× at the cost of a larger
TCB.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Justin-time compilers; Formal language definitions; Compilers;
• Computer systems organization → Embedded systems.
Keywords: eBPF, JIT compilation, kernel extensions, instruction set extension, verified compilation, proof-carrying code

1

4 ETH Zurich

Introduction

Extended Berkeley Packet Filter (eBPF) safely extends OS
kernels in domains including networking [5, 20], observability [3, 11], security [2, 6], and scheduling [7]. eBPF’s
∗ Equal contribution.

1

instructions but that the eBPF instruction set expresses only
as multi-instruction sequences. The idioms that the kernel
JIT compiles poorly form a small, bounded set, so a handful
of operations suffices. A 64-bit rotate with a variable shift,
a single ROL instruction on x86-64, arrives at the kernel JIT
as eight bytecode instructions and is emitted as 15 machine
instructions. With Kops, we build EInsn, a set of seven such
operations. We prove in Lean 4 that, for each operation, the
native emit has the same eBPF-visible effect as the proof
sequence, carrying the verifier’s guarantee to the native
code.
We implement Kops in the Linux kernel and in userspace
tooling, as a small change to the kernel core, a compile-time
recognizer, and kernel modules that supply the operations.
EInsn speeds up eBPF microbenchmarks by up to 24% on
x86-64 and 22% on ARM64 over the unmodified pipeline,
recovering up to 42% of the gap to native code, and improves
production application throughput by up to 12%. Native code
size shrinks by 12–23% with no change to the existing verifier analysis (§7). The same Kops mechanism also supports
whole-program native replacement, reaching 2.358× on Cilium at the cost of trusting the application’s native code (§7.4).
A new operation ships as a kernel module, and the existing
verifier analysis stays untouched.
Contributions. We make the following contributions:

User Space

eBPF
Verifier

clang
bytecode

eBPF JIT
Compiler
bytecode
(verified)

hook
point
native
code

Figure 1. The eBPF execution pipeline.

The eBPF Compilation Pipeline

This section describes the three stages of the eBPF compilation pipeline, with attention to how much each stage
optimizes the program and to the instruction-set boundary
that every stage respects. Every eBPF program reaches the
kernel through the pipeline, shown in Figure 1. A user-space
compiler produces bytecode, which the kernel verifies and
JIT-compiles. The compiled program then attaches to a hook
such as XDP or tc.
Source compilation. The user-space compiler does most
of the pipeline’s optimization. A language front end such
as Clang lowers the source to LLVM IR, and LLVM’s middle end runs its full optimization passes. The eBPF backend

event
trigger

• We present Kops, a mechanism that extends the eBPF
compilation pipeline with new operations while reusing
the existing verifier for safety (§4).
• With Kops, we build EInsn, a set of seven hardwareidiom operations that the simple kernel JIT emits directly (§5).
• We prove in Lean 4 that each EInsn native emit has
the same eBPF-visible effect as the proof sequence the
verifier checks, so the verifier’s guarantee carries over
to the native code (§5).
• An implementation in the Linux kernel and userspace
tooling (§6) recovers up to 42% of the eBPF-native gap
in our evaluation (§7).

2

Kernel

source
code

2

then lowers the result to bytecode restricted to the operations the instruction set defines. Optimization research also
targets this stage, where compile-time optimizers such as
Merlin [19], K2 [30], and EPSO [33] rewrite programs for
speed and size. The optimizers all stay within the instruction set, a boundary the verifier enforces. The instruction set
has no single-instruction form for hardware idioms. Every
optimizer at this stage, including LLVM, therefore emits the
idioms as multi-instruction sequences.
Verification. The verifier checks safety, changes the program little, and enforces the instruction set. The verifier
proves memory safety, termination, and similar properties
by static analysis [10]. The analysis proceeds opcode by opcode, over the 123 opcodes the instruction set defines [25].
An opcode the instruction set does not define is rejected.
The rejection makes the instruction set a hard boundary for
every upstream optimizer, so the idioms reach the JIT as
multi-instruction sequences. After a program passes, the verifier applies only a few targeted rewrites, such as dead-code
elimination. A few systems also optimize at this load-time
stage, such as KFuse [13], which merges verified programs
within the instruction set. The verifier then passes the program to the JIT. The kernel also exposes kfuncs, native kernel
functions that eBPF programs may call, registered by loadable modules with BTF type metadata [16]; Kops reuses this
registration infrastructure (§6.1).
JIT compilation. The kernel’s per-opcode JIT does almost
no optimization. The kernel maintains one such JIT for each
supported architecture. Translation proceeds one opcode at a
time, with the eBPF registers r0–r10 mapped to fixed native
registers. The only optimization choices are within one instruction’s encoding, such as picking the shortest immediate
form on x86-64. The JIT runs no general cross-instruction
optimization, such as global register allocation or instruction scheduling. The simple design keeps the JIT small and
trustworthy beside the verifier, a tradeoff that §3.5 returns to.
The multi-instruction sequences the backend emits therefore
survive into the machine code unoptimized, at a cost that §3
measures.

3

Table 1. Speedup over the kernel eBPF JIT on the 27 purebytecode microbenchmarks, as the geometric mean of median steady-state time. A path counts as faster on a benchmark when it beats the kernel eBPF JIT by more than 2%.

Characterization of the eBPF-Native
Performance Gap

The same source program runs 1.57× slower on x86-64,
and 1.98× slower on ARM64, through the eBPF compilation pipeline than under direct native compilation (Table 1).
We characterize the gap on pure-bytecode microbenchmarks,
computation kernels that use no helper calls or map accesses,
through three questions:
• C-RQ1. How much does in-kernel execution slow native code?
• C-RQ2. How much of the gap can an optimizing compiler recover from the same verified bytecode?
• C-RQ3. Which operations does the per-opcode kernel
JIT compile poorly?

Speedup

# Cases Faster

x86-64

In-kernel native
Userspace native
Userspace LLVM-BPF

1.55×
1.57×
1.53×

24/27
25/27
25/27

ARM64

In-kernel native
Userspace native
Userspace LLVM-BPF

1.88×
1.98×
1.92×

27/27
27/27
27/27

3.2

C-RQ1: How Much Does In-Kernel Execution
Slow Native Code?

In the kernel, native code runs about as fast as in userspace.
On x86-64, Figure 2 shows in-kernel native at 1.55× and
userspace native at 1.57× over the kernel eBPF JIT, a difference of about 2%. On ARM64 the difference is about 5%,
1.88× against 1.98×. The two paths run native code from the
same source and differ in where the code runs. The spread
therefore bounds the cost of in-kernel execution at about
2–5%. The cost is small, and the gap comes mainly from code
generation.

Experimental Setup

Benchmarks. The corpus is 27 pure-bytecode microbenchmarks. Each is a computation kernel from a real eBPF program in networking, tracing, or security. The examples include a consistent-hash load-balancer lookup from katran
and a SipHash-like 64-bit-rotation mixer. The kernels use
no helper calls or map accesses, so each measurement isolates instruction execution. The gap therefore characterizes
the bytecode-to-native code-generation quality; in production programs, helper and map time dilutes the instructionexecution share, so case study in §7 measures the end-to-end
effect separately.
Execution paths. We compile each benchmark through
four execution paths, the kernel eBPF JIT baseline plus the
three paths in Table 1. The paths vary the final backend
and where the code runs. The kernel eBPF JIT compiles the
verified bytecode in the kernel and is the baseline. In-kernel
native and userspace native run native code from the same
source, inside and outside the kernel. Userspace LLVM-BPF
recompiles the same bytecode with an optimizing compiler
in userspace [32]. Three pairwise comparisons attribute the
gap. In-kernel native against userspace native isolates inkernel execution. The kernel eBPF JIT against userspace
LLVM-BPF isolates the per-opcode kernel JIT, given the inkernel execution bound from C-RQ1. Userspace LLVM-BPF
against userspace native isolates the bytecode form.
Metric. A path’s speedup on a benchmark is the kernel
eBPF JIT’s median steady-state execution time divided by
the path’s time. Each reported speedup is the geometric

Path

mean over the benchmarks. Load, link, and compile time
stay outside the speedup.

The three questions decompose the gap. The first separates the cost of in-kernel execution from the quality of the
machine code the pipeline generates. Within code generation, the second weighs the per-opcode kernel JIT against
the bytecode the JIT compiles. The third identifies which
operations the JIT compiles poorly, so a fix can target the
operations. The section closes with why the kernel cannot
host an optimizing compiler (§3.5).
3.1

Platform

Finding 1: The eBPF-native gap comes from code generation. In-kernel execution slows native code by only about
2% on x86-64 and 5% on ARM64.
3.3 C-RQ2: How Much Can an Optimizing Compiler
Recover?
Code from an optimizing compiler on the same bytecode
runs almost as fast as native code. Userspace LLVM-BPF
compiles the same verified bytecode that the kernel runs, but
with an optimizing backend in place of the per-opcode kernel
JIT. As Table 1 shows, userspace LLVM-BPF reaches 1.53×
on x86-64 and 1.92× on ARM64. Against userspace native at
1.57× and 1.98×, the optimizing backend recovers 93% and
94% of the gap. Given the in-kernel execution bound from
C-RQ1, the recovered share measures the performance the
per-opcode kernel JIT loses. The remaining share of the gap,
7% on x86-64 and 6% on ARM64, comes from the bytecode
form, which fixes choices such as the register set and calling
convention before any compiler runs.
Finding 2: The per-opcode kernel JIT is the dominant
source of the generated code’s slowness. An optimizing
compiler recovers 93–94% of the gap from the same verified
3

Userspace native (1.57x)

Userspace LLVM-BPF (1.53x)

ote
l
ct_
nat
toe
plit
z
f
tc_ nv
cks
um
cgr
oup

4x x86-64
3.5x
3x
2.5x
2x
1.5x
1x
0.5x
0x
bit
bin map
_se
arc
run h
q
tra lat
ce_
sw
cks
me um
mc
mp
v
cal lan
l_fa
nou
t
5tu
ple
kat
ran
pol
ic
sip y
has
bou h
nds
fiel
d
bitf
i
e
str ld
_se
arc
h
sys
cal
l
htt
soc p
k_
tcp lb
co
tet nn
rag
on

Speedup over
kernel eBPF JIT

In-kernel native (1.55x)

Userspace native (1.98x)

Userspace LLVM-BPF (1.92x)

4x ARM64
3.5x
3x
2.5x
2x
1.5x
1x
0.5x
0x
bit
bin map
_se
arc
run h
q
tra lat
ce_
sw
cks
me um
mc
mp
v
cal lan
l_fa
nou
t
5tu
ple
kat
ran
pol
ic
sip y
has
bou h
nds
fiel
d
bitf
i
e
str ld
_se
arc
h
sys
cal
l
htt
soc p
k_
tcp lb
co
tet nn
rag
on

ote
l
ct_
nat
toe
plit
z
f
tc_ nv
cks
um
cgr
oup

Speedup over
kernel eBPF JIT

In-kernel native (1.88x)

Figure 2. Per-case speedup over the kernel eBPF JIT on the 27 pure-bytecode microbenchmarks, on x86-64 (top) and ARM64
(bottom). Each bar is one non-baseline path. The ARM64 paths come from separate runs, each over its own baseline.
native machine code is about half the size of the kernel JIT
output, 0.54× on x86-64 and 0.49× on ARM64, an aggregate
that includes losses beyond the idioms.

bytecode. The verified bytecode carries most of what a
compiler needs to generate fast code.

3.4

Finding 3: A significant share of the per-opcode JIT’s loss
comes from a small, bounded set of hardware idioms, such
as rotate, wide load, and conditional select. The remaining
loss comes from cross-instruction optimizations, such as
register allocation and instruction scheduling, that are
outside the scope of a per-idiom fix.

C-RQ3: Which Operations Does the Kernel JIT
Compile Poorly?

The per-opcode kernel JIT compiles hardware idioms poorly.
A hardware idiom has no single-instruction form in the eBPF
instruction set, so the eBPF backend emits the idiom as several bytecode instructions (§2). The kernel JIT then translates
each bytecode instruction separately into one or more machine instructions. Figure 3 shows a 64-bit rotate with a
variable shift under the per-opcode kernel JIT and under
direct native compilation. The rotate arrives at the kernel JIT
as eight bytecode instructions and is emitted as 15 machine
instructions. Direct native compilation uses a single rotate
instruction, ROL on x86-64 or ROR on ARM64.
A small, bounded set of hardware idioms expands the
same way under the kernel JIT. The rotate is one of a handful
of idioms with no single-instruction form. Table 2 lists the
idioms, with the instruction counts along each path. Across
five idiom-stress probes on x86-64, small programs that each
repeat one idiom, the kernel JIT emits 1.25–2.7× as many
instructions as userspace LLVM-BPF for the same programs.
Code size shows the cost across the whole corpus. In-kernel

3.5 Why Not an Optimizing Compiler in the Kernel?

4

The obvious response to the simple kernel JIT is to replace
the JIT with an optimizing compiler. An optimizing compiler
in the kernel would enlarge the trusted computing base behind eBPF’s safety guarantee. The verifier checks only the
bytecode, so the kernel would have to trust the far larger
compiler that produces the native code. Such a compiler
would also grow the kernel code that must be maintained
and audited for each supported architecture. A practical fix
instead keeps the simple kernel JIT and targets the idiom
share of the loss by letting the JIT emit a bounded set of
hardware idioms directly.

C Source Code

x86-64 (Optimal)

static u64 micro_rotl64(u64 value,
u32 shift)
{
shift &= 63U;
if (shift == 0) {
return value;
}
return (value << shift)
| (value >> (64U - shift));
}

movl %esi, %ecx
movq %rdi, %rax
rolq %cl, %rax

BPF Bytecode

r1 &= 63
if r1 == 0 goto +6
r2 = 64
r2 -= r1
r3 = r0
r3 <<= r1
r0 >>= r2
r0 |= r3

targets the operations C-RQ3 identifies. The in-kernel execution cost (C-RQ1) and the bytecode-form residual (C-RQ2)
stay out of scope, and §7 measures how much of the JIT’s
loss the idioms carry.

4

clang

Kops extends the eBPF compilation pipeline with new operations that the existing verifier checks and the kernel JIT
emits directly. Each operation has two forms: a proof sequence of vanilla eBPF that the verifier checks and a native
emit that the CPU runs. Figure 4 contrasts the pipeline with
and without Kops. A compile-time recognizer rewrites an
operation’s pattern into one or more extended instructions,
each a pair of a call and a sidecar that carries the operands.
Each call selects a descriptor from a kernel module, and the
descriptor supplies both forms for its instruction. The same
program therefore verifies as vanilla eBPF and runs as native
code. Kops meets the three constraints of §3.5: the safety
guarantee stays intact up to one explicit obligation (§4.3),
the kernel core changes once (§4.2), and verification stays
architecture-independent (§4.1). §5 then presents EInsn, the
hardware-idiom operations built with the mechanism.

x86-64 (Under Optimized)

JIT

and $0x3f, %rdi
test %rdi, %rdi
je <done>
mov $0x40, %esi
sub %rdi, %rsi
mov %rax, %rdx
push %rcx
mov %rdi, %rcx
shl %cl, %rdx
pop %rcx
push %rcx
mov %rsi, %rcx
shr %cl, %rax
pop %rcx
or %rdx, %rax

Figure 3. Compiling a 64-bit rotate with a variable shift. Direct compilation to x86-64 emits a single ROL. Through eBPF
the rotate becomes eight bytecode instructions, which the
per-opcode kernel JIT translates separately into 15 machine
instructions (Linux 6.1, x86-64).

4.1

Table 2. Hardware idioms and their instruction counts along
each path, measured on x86-64 from real JIT dumps and compiler output. The second column names the native instruction on x86-64 / ARM64. Byte swap assumes a MOVBE-capable
x86-64. The bulk-copy row is a 64-byte copy between nonoverlapping regions.
# Instructions
Operation

Native instruction

Rotate
ROL/ROR
Wide load
MOV/LDR
Conditional select CMP+CMOV/CMP+CSEL
Byte swap
MOVBE/REV
Bulk copy (64 B) MOVUPS/LDP+STP

Native eBPF Kernel JIT
1
1
2
1
4

8
22
3
2
16

15
22
4
2
16

Emitting the idioms from the simple kernel JIT must meet
three constraints, which the next section addresses. First, the
verifier must still prove every program safe, which keeps
eBPF’s existing guarantee unchanged. Second, adding an operation must not require rewriting the verifier or the JIT core,
which keeps the kernel change small and one-time. Third,
one operation must map to a different native instruction on
each architecture, which keeps verification of the operation
architecture-independent. Within these constraints the fix

Kops: Extending the eBPF Compilation
Pipeline

5

The Compilation Pipeline

Recognition. The recognizer matches the patterns of supported operations in userspace, before the program loads
(§6.2). For EInsn’s rotate, the pattern is the shift-and-or sequence of Figure 3. The call and the sidecar reuse existing
eBPF opcodes. Kops therefore adds no new opcode.
Verification. The verifier checks an extended instruction by
lowering it to vanilla eBPF. The proof sequence is a fragment
of vanilla eBPF with the same semantics as the extended
instruction. A lowering stage substitutes the proof sequence
for the extended instruction before the main analysis. The
verifier then analyzes the lowered program with its existing
transfer functions. After the analysis succeeds, a restore stage
reinstates the extended instructions for the JIT.
Execution. The JIT dispatches each extended instruction
to the descriptor’s native emit for the running architecture.
For EInsn’s rotate, the native emit is a single ROL on x86-64
or a single ROR on ARM64. The exact proof sequence, like
the native emit, can differ across architectures. Every proofsequence variant stays vanilla eBPF. Verification therefore
stays architecture-independent. When a descriptor provides
no native emit for the architecture, the extended instruction
falls back to its proof sequence, which the JIT compiles as
vanilla eBPF. The interpreter has no dispatch for extended instructions. A kernel without a JIT therefore rejects programs
that carry extended instructions.

4.2

Table 3. The seven EInsn operations, each with the canonical
proof sequence and the native emit per architecture. Exact
proof sequences vary by descriptor and architecture (§4). A
dash marks an architecture with no native emit, where the
operation falls back to its proof sequence. Each native-emit
cell lists the instructions emitted for one operation instance.
Table 2 counts the instructions along each compilation path
for the idioms the two tables share, and the native compiler’s
instruction choice there can differ from the native emit here.

Adding an Operation

A new operation needs only descriptors in a kernel module and a pattern in the recognizer. A descriptor is a small
kernel structure with two author-supplied parts, the proofsequence routine and the per-architecture native emits. A
family of descriptors implements an operation, one descriptor per variant, such as width, condition, or architecture. A
kernel module registers its descriptors with the kernel core.
Kops’s one-time change to the kernel core stays the same
for every operation (§6).
The mechanism leaves an operation’s size open. A proof
sequence may span a few instructions or an entire region
within the rules of §4.3.
4.3

Native emit

Safety and the Trusted Base

Kops does not add operation-specific abstract semantics to
the verifier. Everything the recognizer and the module contribute reaches the verifier inside the lowered program. The
verifier re-checks the lowered program on every load, with
the same analysis as for vanilla eBPF. A faulty rewrite or
proof sequence that violates safety therefore fails verification
like any unsafe program.
The verifier’s verdict on the lowered program carries over
to the restored program. The restore stage collapses each
proof region, the span its proof sequence occupies, back into
its extended instruction and changes nothing else. For the collapse to preserve the verdict, a region must stay single-entry
and single-exit, free of nested extended instructions, calls,
exits, and backward jumps. Control then enters a region only
at its top and leaves only past its end, like a single instruction.
The kernel validates proof-region well-formedness at load
time, including single entry, single exit, no nested extended
instructions, and no calls or exits inside a region. The kernel
also validates that no jump enters or leaves a region except
at its boundary.
The trusted enforcement path therefore consists of the
existing eBPF verifier and JIT plus a small, generic Kops
patch that validates proof regions, lowers extended instructions before verification, restores them after verification, and
dispatches their native emits (§6). The per-operation native
emit is the one component whose correctness Kops cannot
check at load time. Every operation must therefore supply
evidence that its native emit has the same eBPF-visible effect as its proof sequence. For EInsn, the Lean 4 proofs of
§5 supply the evidence. The userspace recognizer is outside
the safety boundary: an incorrect rewrite produces a program the verifier re-checks and rejects or accepts on its own
merits.

5

EInsn: Hardware-Idiom Operations

With Kops, we build EInsn, a set of seven operations for hardware idioms. Each operation targets an idiom for which the

6

Operation

Proof sequence

x86-64

ARM64

Rotate
Conditional select
Bit extract
Byte swap
Prefetch
Bulk copy
LEA

two shifts + or
branch + move
shift + and
load + byte swap
no-op (JA +0)
loads + stores
shift + adds

ROL
CMP+CMOV
BEXTR
MOVBE
PREFETCHT0
MOV
LEA

ROR
TST+CSEL
UBFX
LDR+REV
PRFM
LDP+STP
–

eBPF instruction set has no single-instruction form. The rotate, for example, covers its 64-bit and 32-bit variants through
separate descriptors. The section closes with the Lean 4
proofs that supply the evidence §4.3 requires.
The seven operations are a deliberate choice within the
space that §4.2 leaves open. The idioms of the kind §3.4
characterizes are few. A handful of modules therefore covers
the kernel JIT’s clearest losses. Each proof sequence stays
a small fragment of the program. The equivalence evidence
each operation owes covers only that fragment. The compiler
emits six of the seven idioms as fixed bytecode patterns,
which the recognizer matches in place. The prefetch alone
has no eBPF form of any length. The recognizer instead
inserts the prefetch at sites it selects, with a no-op proof
sequence.
Table 3 lists the seven operations, each with its proof sequence and its native emit on x86-64 and ARM64. The native
emits differ across architectures, in shape and in availability.
A conditional select compiles to one extended instruction
on x86-64, emitting the CMP+CMOV pair, and to two extended
instructions on ARM64, one emitting TST and one emitting
CSEL. The byte swap, fused with its load, splits the same
way on ARM64, into an LDR and a REV. One operation, the
address computation LEA, exists on x86-64 alone.
Formal verification. The dual lowering of a EInsn: one
path expands to vanilla eBPF for the verifier, the other emits
native code in the JIT, imposes a proof obligation. The native
sequence that the CPU actually executes must produce the
same eBPF-observable architectural state as the eBPF expansion. We therefore prove, in Lean 4, that for each supported
EInsn operation, the eBPF expansion and the corresponding
native sequence produce the same eBPF-observable architectural state. For register-only operations such as rotate,

Table 4. The kernel core is a 929-line addition, measured as
lines added on the Kops kernel branch over mainline Linux.
The total excludes 11 lines of disassembler support and toolsside header sync.
Component

Table 5. Extended-instruction encoding. A reserved src_reg
value marks the pair for Kops, a BPF_CALL for the call and
a MOV64_K for the sidecar. The notation [h:l] gives a field’s
position within the 52-bit sidecar payload.

Lines of code

Insn

Field

Bits

Meaning

Verifier (lowering, restore, validation)
BTF and registration
JIT dispatch (ARM64)
JIT dispatch (x86-64)
Headers

487
139
121
97
85

Call

imm

32

off

16

BTF ID of the operation’s stub
kfunc
Index into fd_array for the
module’s BTF file descriptor

dst_reg

Total kernel core

929

[3:0]

off

[19:4]

imm

[51:20]

Sidecar

conditional select, and bit extract, the refinement reduces to
equality on the destination register. For memory-touching
operations such as byte swap (fused with its load) and bulk
copy, the proof obligation is equality on the projected architectural state over live registers and the accessed memory,
leaving all other eBPF-visible memory unchanged. Prefetch
is modeled as an architectural no-op; microarchitectural effects such as cache state are outside the semantic model. We
give each ISA a small-step register-transfer semantics; a program denotes the fold of its per-instruction transitions. The
native instruction’s semantics is ported from the existing
formalization [1]. The cross-ISA proof is factored through
an intermediate hardware-independent specification. The
refinement is stated for verifier-accepted proof sequences
and verifier-safe initial states. For each EInsn operation, we
define a specification over the relevant architectural state
and discharge ISA-local correctness lemmas stating that the
eBPF expansion and the native sequence each refine the
specification.

6

number. The kernel reverses the re-encoding when reading
the sidecar.
Verifier lowering and restore. The verifier gains a lowering stage and a restore stage around its existing analysis. The
lowering stage traverses the program backward and replaces
each extended instruction with the proof sequence from its
descriptor. The stage records each original pair for restoration. The verifier then runs unchanged on the lowered program. The restore stage reinstates the extended instructions
after verification succeeds. With proof-sequence validation
and the supporting bookkeeping, the changes to the verifier
total 487 lines, the largest single component.
JIT dispatch. The x86-64 and ARM64 JIT backends each
gain a dispatch case for extended instructions. On reaching an extended instruction, the JIT looks up the descriptor
and decodes the sidecar payload. The JIT then calls the descriptor’s native emit for the running architecture. When a
descriptor has no native emit for the architecture, the kernel
rewrites the site back to its proof sequence during load-time
fixups, before the JIT runs. The dispatch logic is 97 lines on
x86-64 and 121 lines on ARM64.
Module registration. A loaded module registers its descriptors for lookup by the verifier and the JIT. Registration reuses
two existing kernel facilities, BTF, the kernel’s type metadata
for eBPF objects, and kfuncs, kernel functions that eBPF programs may call. Each module exports a stub kfunc as its BTF
anchor. The module lists its struct bpf_einsn descriptors
in a parallel array. The kernel caches the descriptors per
program. The BTF and registration changes are 139 lines.
The new struct bpf_einsn type and helpers add 85 lines
of headers.

Implementation

We implement Kops in three parts. The kernel core is a onetime change to the verifier and the JIT (§6.1). A compile-time
recognizer rewrites idioms in userspace before load (§6.2).
Each operation ships as one or more loadable kernel modules
(§6.3).
6.1

Kernel Core

The kernel core adds 929 lines to the Linux kernel. Table 4
breaks the total down by component.
Instruction encoding. Each extended instruction is a pair
of instructions, a call and a sidecar, shown in Table 5. Both
reuse existing eBPF opcodes, and a reserved src_reg value
marks the pair for Kops. The call identifies the descriptor
to use. The sidecar carries a packed 52-bit payload with the
operands. The low four bits of the payload must form a valid
eBPF register number. The recognizer therefore re-encodes
a payload whose low four bits exceed the largest register

Destination register or
per-descriptor form tag
Offset or auxiliary field per
descriptor
Immediate value or configuration
per descriptor

6.2

7

Compile-Time Recognizer

The recognizer rewrites a program’s idioms into extended
instructions before load, through two paths. A program built
without the recognizer, or one whose idioms the recognizer

does not match, produces the same vanilla eBPF bytecode
and runs through the unchanged pipeline.
Selector. The first path is a selector in the LLVM eBPF backend. The selector matches idioms during instruction selection
and emits the call and sidecar in place of the decomposed
bytecode. Counted over the backend’s Kops commits, the
selector adds 2,126 lines, half in a new selection module.
Bytecode recovery. The second path is a bytecode-recovery
pass that re-matches idioms on already-compiled bytecode.
The pass covers bytecode the selector never sees or cannot
match, such as programs compiled by a separate toolchain.
The implementation is a standalone userspace tool of 6,967
lines. The pass checks that each rewrite preserves the program’s semantics, for example that a temporary register the
idiom overwrites is dead afterward. Even a wrong rewrite
leaves the program safe, because the verifier re-checks every
lowered program (§4.3).
6.3

Evaluation environment. We use two evaluation platforms. The x86-64 experiments run in a KVM virtual machine with 8 vCPUs and 64 GB RAM on an Intel Xeon Silver
4210R @ 2.40 GHz host, using Linux 7.0.0-rc2+. The ARM64
experiments run on an AWS t4g.small instance (2 vCPUs,
2 GiB RAM, AWS Graviton2), using a EInsn-enabled Linux
7.0.0-rc2+ build. These platforms cover both the microbenchmark suite and the production-application experiments. For
matched application comparisons, the stock and EInsn runs
use the same kernel image and differ only in the loaded
program form or EInsn policy.
Measurement conventions. Unless otherwise stated, each
experiment uses three measured runs and reports the median. Execution-time and throughput ratios are normalized
to the stock kernel eBPF JIT, so values above 1× indicate
faster execution or higher throughput. BPF-cost ratios report
post/baseline cost, so values below 1× indicate lower BPF
runtime cost. For BPF-counter results, we report post/baseline ns/run for retained counter rows. For each retained row,
we compute run_time_ns_delta/run_cnt_delta, drop rows
with fewer than 100 runs in either phase, and pair rows by
program name, program type, and occurrence index.

Operation Modules

Each operation is packaged as one or more kernel modules,
separate from the kernel core. A module supplies an operation’s proof-sequence routine, its native emits, and the BTF
registration that exposes both.
Each module covers one native instruction on one architecture. An operation that targets a single architecture contributes modules on that architecture only, which is why the
per-architecture counts differ. The module tree holds 14 modules on x86-64 and 11 on ARM64, 9,765 lines in all, including
shared helper headers, test-only modules, and operations
beyond EInsn’s seven (Table 3).

7

7.1 RQ1: x86-64 and ARM64 Microbenchmark Signal

Evaluation

This section evaluates EInsn, the hardware-idiom instantiation of Kops. Kops provides the extension mechanism,
while EInsn provides the concrete descriptor families used
in our experiments. EInsn operates below the instruction-set
boundary, complementary to bytecode optimizers [19, 30, 33]
that cannot emit native idioms the ISA lacks. We use two
workload classes. First, we reuse the 27 pure-bytecode microbenchmarks from §3 to isolate instruction-selection effects. Second, we use production datapath applications to
test whether those effects matter in real BPF loading and
execution paths. We answer four questions:
• RQ1: How effectively does EInsn improve generated
native-code efficiency across architectures?
• RQ2: How does EInsn perform on production applications?
• RQ3: How sensitive is EInsn to family-selection policy?
• RQ4: How does Kops compare with a native-in-kernel
upper bound?

8

EInsn reduces generated native-code size on both evaluated
architectures. Relative to the stock kernel eBPF JIT, generated
kernel JIT code shrinks to 0.772× on x86-64 KVM and 0.879×
on ARM64 AWS, corresponding to geomean reductions of
22.8% and 12.1%, respectively.
Figure 5 reports the corresponding execution-time results.
On x86-64 KVM, the EInsn-enabled run achieves a 1.242× geomean speedup over the stock kernel eBPF JIT, reducing execution time by 19.47%. On ARM64 AWS, the EInsn-enabled
run applies all matched EInsn sites, with 308/308 sites in
the median sample and 924/924 site instances across all samples. Over the 27 EInsn-bearing benchmarks, it achieves a
1.222× geomean speedup over the stock kernel eBPF JIT, reducing execution time by 18.17%. Both architectures produce
zero correctness mismatches. On the microbenchmarks, the
1.242× speedup recovers 42% of the characterization’s 1.57×
eBPF-native gap on x86-64 ((1.242−1)/(1.57−1)).
The per-benchmark distributions suggest different sources
of benefit across architectures. On x86-64, speedups are more
closely associated with native code-size reduction, which is
consistent with EInsn replacing conservative stock-JIT instruction sequences and reducing dynamic instruction overhead. On ARM64, code-size reduction alone is less explanatory: the largest gains appear when the selector reaches
target-specific idioms such as rotate/extract operations and
packet-field load fusion. For example, siphash_rotate64_
mixer reaches a 1.902× speedup on ARM64 with dominant

7.2

results raise a follow-up question: once EInsn reaches real
application bytecode, should it enable every matched family,
or should it select families by workload-specific profitability?
Ratio to stock eBPF

extract-style sites, while networking-oriented microbenchmarks such as Cilium socket load balancing, BCC TCP tuple filtering, and Cilium CT/NAT tuple rewriting achieve
speedups of 1.691×, 1.624×, and 1.482×, respectively. These
results suggest that EInsn is not merely a code-size optimization. Rather, it acts as an architecture-sensitive specialization
mechanism whose effectiveness depends on the stock JIT
baseline, the selected descriptor family, and whether the
selected sites lie on performance-critical execution paths.
The regressions also reveal the current boundary of the
selector. bpftrace_comm_key_fnv_hash regresses to 0.862×
on ARM64, while bitmap_popcount_scan regresses to 0.966×
despite having applied EInsn sites. These cases indicate that
EInsn is not uniformly beneficial and motivate descriptorlevel gating or lightweight cost-model guidance, rather than
blindly applying every matched EInsn site.
Load-time overhead. The EInsn lowering and restore stages
add two linear passes over the program during verification.
Across all 62 microbenchmarks on x86-64 KVM, the kernelside load time (object_load_ns, covering verification and
JIT) shows a 0.99× geomean ratio relative to the stock kernel,
i.e., no measurable overhead. For programs with EInsn sites,
the end-to-end compile time (including the userspace recognizer) increases by 1.4–2.4×, but remains sub-millisecond in
absolute terms.

1.1

1.074x

BPF cost ↓
1.073x

1.062x
1.009x

0.995x

1.0

1.006x
0.941x

Cilium
Full
4086 sites

Cilium
No Bulk
3512 sites

Katran
Full
62 sites

Katran
Conservative
21 sites

Figure 6. Application-level EInsn policy probes. Workload
throughput ratios are higher-is-better, while BPF cost ratios
are lower-is-better. Cilium compares the full EInsn policy
with the no-bulk policy; Katran compares a more-sites policy
with the selected-family policy. The dashed line marks the
stock eBPF baseline.
7.3

RQ2: Real Packet-Processing Applications

Microbenchmarks isolate individual instruction patterns, but
packet-processing applications combine those patterns with
maps, helper calls, tail calls, and application-specific datapath
structure. We therefore evaluate EInsn on two real eBPF
packet-processing applications: Cilium and Katran. Cilium
represents a large tail-call-heavy Kubernetes datapath, while
Katran represents a compact high-rate XDP load balancer
with a hot directly attached program. We measure end-to-end
datapath throughput with BPF runtime statistics disabled to
avoid measurement overhead.
Cilium on x86-64. On x86-64 KVM, the default full-EInsn
policy improves Cilium’s end-to-end datapath throughput
by 1.074× over the stock kernel eBPF JIT. This run applies
4086 EInsn sites with zero load-time skips or report errors.
The applied sites span several families: LEA contributes 2346
sites, conditional select 385, endian fusion 766, extract 2, and
bulk memory 587. This confirms that EInsn reaches real
bytecode patterns in Cilium’s production datapath.
Katran on ARM64. On ARM64 AWS, the conservative
EInsn policy applies 21 sites and improves Katran’s end-toend workload throughput by 1.073× over the stock kernel
eBPF JIT. Because Katran’s datapath is dominated by a single
hot XDP program, the throughput signal is clean: the program that receives EInsn sites is the program on the critical
path.
Together, these two case studies show that EInsn improves
real packet-processing workloads on both architectures. The

Workload throughput ↑
1.114x

9

RQ3: Family-Selection Policy Sensitivity

EInsn creates a policy surface above the Kops kernel mechanism. The kernel mechanism exposes a bounded set of verified descriptor families, but enabling a family is a performance decision: each matched site trades the dynamic work
saved by a shorter native idiom against the cost and placement of the replacement in a particular datapath. A simple
policy would maximize coverage, i.e., enable every implemented family and apply as many matched sites as possible.
Figure 6 illustrates this policy effect by comparing two paired
policy perturbations on Cilium and Katran.
For Cilium, we start from the full x86-64 EInsn policy
used in RQ2. As shown in Figure 6, this policy applies 4086
sites and improves workload throughput to 1.074×, while
the BPF-cost ratio remains near neutral at 1.009×. We then
disable only the bulk_memory family while keeping the other
EInsn families enabled. This reduces the number of applied
sites from 4086 to 3512, but increases workload throughput
further to 1.114×. At the same time, the BPF-cost ratio rises
to 1.062×, so this result should not be read as saying that
bulk_memory is universally harmful. Rather, it shows that
an additional family can increase syntactic coverage without
improving the measured datapath: the saved instructions
may not outweigh the replacement overhead, or they may
not lie on the part of the datapath that dominates throughput.
Katran shows the same policy lesson more directly. Figure 6 shows that the conservative ARM64 policy used in
RQ2 applies 21 sites and improves Katran to 1.073× workload throughput, while reducing BPF cost to 0.941×. To test
whether simply increasing coverage is beneficial, we then
force a coverage-max policy that enables every implemented
ARM64 family and applies 62 sites. The result is worse despite the larger number of applied sites: workload throughput

falls to 0.995×, and BPF cost rises to 1.006×. Because Katran
is dominated by a single hot XDP path, this result gives a
particularly clear counterexample to coverage maximization:
adding more matched sites does not translate into either
higher throughput or lower BPF cost.
Taken together, the figure rejects raw site count as the
right objective for EInsn policy. The useful objective is profitability: a descriptor family should be enabled when its
replacements save enough dynamic work on the target workload to justify their cost, rather than simply because they
increase the number of matched sites.

throughput gain recovers 5.4% of the 2.358× native upper
bound’s gap ((1.074−1)/(2.358−1)), compared with 42% on
the microbenchmarks, because real datapaths spend most of
their time in helpers, maps, and tail calls that EInsn does not
target. EInsn does not reach the native upper bound, but it
provides controllable speedups through a bounded, kerneldefined instruction surface rather than trusting whole native
replacement objects.

7.4

eBPF bytecode optimization. Bytecode optimizers improve eBPF programs within the existing instruction set.
K2 [30] searches for shorter bytecode with stochastic synthesis. Merlin [19] rewrites programs at the LLVM-IR and
bytecode levels. EPSO [33] applies rewrite rules from offline
enumerative superoptimization. ePass [29] lifts bytecode into
SSA form for program transformation. KFuse [13] merges
chains of eBPF programs into one program after verification.
Kops extends the set of operations available to a program.
Extending eBPF’s operations. The existing routes to new
operations are kfuncs and instruction-set extensions. A kfunc
exposes a kernel function for eBPF programs to call [16]. The
verifier checks a kfunc call’s arguments against BTF types,
and the body runs as native code outside the verifier’s analysis. hXDP [4] extends the eBPF instruction set for FPGA
targets, and the translated programs run outside the verifier’s coverage. The eBPF instruction set is now an IETF
standard [25], so a revision is a standardization effort. A
Kops operation shows the verifier its full semantics via a
proof sequence in the lowered program (§4.1). A new operation ships as a kernel module plus a recognizer pattern, with
no instruction-set revision (§4.2).
Relocating execution or the safety argument. Another
line of work relocates eBPF execution or changes the foundation of its safety argument. bpftime [32] runs eBPF programs
in userspace. eBPF for Windows [21] checks programs in
userspace with the PREVAIL verifier [10] and loads checked
programs as signed driver modules. Craun et al. [8] verify, compile, and sign programs on a separate host for embedded devices. KFlex [9] moves only the extension’s own
memory safety and termination to runtime checks. Rex [12]
drops the verifier and accepts extensions written in safe Rust.
MOAT [18] and SafeBPF [15] add runtime isolation beneath
the verifier’s static checks. With Kops, programs stay in the
kernel, under the existing verifier’s load-time check. Beyond
Kops’s generic enforcement core, the only per-operation
addition to the trusted base is the native emit (§4.3).
Verified compilation and proof-carrying code. Verified
compilation provides the techniques behind the EInsn proofs.
CompCert [14] established mechanized semantic preservation for a realistic compiler. Alive2 [17] checks refinement
for each LLVM transformation. Jitk [28] compiles classic BPF

8

RQ4: Native-in-Kernel Upper Bound

The three RQs above evaluate EInsn as an instantiation of
Kops. We now place Kops in a broader design space by using
Kops itself to load whole-program native replacements. In
this experiment, each Cilium BPF program is compiled from
the same C source along two paths: the proof sequence is
the normal eBPF bytecode that the verifier checks, while
the native emit is the same source compiled with LLVM -O2
directly to native code. The verifier still checks the eBPF
proof sequence on every load, but the equivalence between
the two compilations is trusted rather than proved, so the application’s native code becomes part of the TCB. The 2.358×
upper bound is not comparable to the characterization’s
1.57× microbenchmark gap, which measures pure-bytecode
kernels in isolation rather than Cilium’s full datapath.
We use Cilium for this upper-bound study because it is the
same kind of datapath workload evaluated above. The nativein-kernel experiment uses the same x86-64 KVM application
setup as the Cilium EInsn runs. It is not a claim about Cilium
control-plane throughput: it measures steady-state datapath
throughput after endpoint setup, with runtime reload and regeneration controllers disabled and the Cilium agent paused
during measured workload samples.
Relaxing the trust boundary exposes a much higher performance ceiling. Cilium throughput improves by 2.358× over
stock eBPF, and retained BPF cost drops from 488.7 ns/run
to 262.3 ns/run, a 1.86× BPF-counter speedup.
The performance gain comes with a larger trusted surface.
The Cilium native run logs 113 native replacements and 22
manifest no-match pass-throughs. The native sidecar data
also records 89 Cilium manifest objects across 8 native files.
These numbers are not a full TCB LOC audit, but they show
the scale of the code surface that the native path must trust
or validate.
This places stock eBPF, Kops instantiated as EInsn, and
native-in-kernel execution at three points in the same design space. Stock eBPF is the most conservative point: it
keeps the existing verifier/JIT trust boundary but pays the
cost of a small virtual instruction set. Native-in-kernel execution is the performance ceiling under an assumed-safe
model, but it trusts whole native replacements and the loader
path. EInsn occupies the middle ground: its 1.074× Cilium

10

Related Work

through a Coq-verified JIT that replaces the seccomp interpreter path. Jitterbug [23] proves behavioral equivalence for
per-instruction eBPF JIT translation with an SMT solver, and
JitSynth [26] synthesizes such verified JITs from interpreter
semantics. CertrBPF [31] derives a verified C implementation
of an eBPF interpreter from a Coq specification. All of these
systems target a fixed instruction set. Each EInsn operation
instead includes its own Lean 4 proof that the native emit
has the same eBPF-visible effect as its proof sequence (§5).
Beyond the translators, machine-checked proofs also target eBPF’s verification and loading steps. Agni [27] verifies offline the eBPF verifier’s range analysis, on whose
soundness Kops’s safety argument rests. BCF [24] supplies
abstraction-refinement proofs from userspace, which the
kernel checks at load time. EInsn’s equivalence proofs stay
offline, as development-time evidence that never enters the
kernel. Proof-carrying code (PCC) [22] is the closest ancestor
of Kops. Both admit untrusted code into the kernel only after
an in-kernel check, but whereas PCC installs a new proof
checker, Kops reuses the existing eBPF verifier.

9

[6] Jonathan Corbet. 2019. KRSI—the other BPF security module. LWN.net,
https://lwn.net/Articles/808048/. Accessed: 2026-04-06.
[7] Jonathan Corbet. 2023. The extensible scheduler class. LWN.net,
https://lwn.net/Articles/922405/. Accessed: 2026-04-06.
[8] Milo Craun, Adam Oswald, and Dan Williams. 2023. Enabling eBPF on
Embedded Systems Through Decoupled Verification. In Proceedings of
the 1st Workshop on EBPF and Kernel Extensions (New York, NY, USA)
(eBPF ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
63–69. https://doi.org/10.1145/3609021.3609299
[9] Kumar Kartikeya Dwivedi, Rishabh Iyer, and Sanidhya Kashyap. 2024.
Fast, Flexible, and Practical Kernel Extensions. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (Austin,
TX, USA) (SOSP ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 249–264. https://doi.org/10.1145/3694715.3695950
[10] Elazar Gershuni, Nadav Amit, Arie Gurfinkel, Nina Narodytska,
Jorge A. Navas, Noam Rinetzky, Leonid Ryzhyk, and Mooly Sagiv.
2019. Simple and precise static analysis of untrusted Linux kernel
extensions. In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Phoenix, AZ, USA)
(PLDI 2019). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 1069–1084. https://doi.org/10.1145/3314221.3314590
[11] IO Visor Project. 2015. BCC: Toolkit for BPF-based Linux Tracing
and Performance Analysis. https://github.com/iovisor/bcc. Accessed:
2026-06-09.
[12] Jinghao Jia, Ruowen Qin, Milo Craun, Egor Lukiyanov, Ayush Bansal,
Minh Phan, Michael V. Le, Hubertus Franke, Hani Jamjoom, Tianyin
Xu, and Dan Williams. 2025. Rex: Closing the Language-Verifier Gap
with Safe and Usable Kernel Extensions. In 2025 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 25). USENIX Association, Boston, MA,
325–342. https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc25/presentation/jia
[13] Hsuan-Chi Kuo, Kai-Hsun Chen, Yicheng Lu, Dan Williams, Sibin
Mohan, and Tianyin Xu. 2022. Verified programs can party: optimizing
kernel extensions via post-verification merging. In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth European Conference on Computer Systems (Rennes, France)
(EuroSys ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 283–299. https://doi.org/10.1145/3492321.3519562
[14] Xavier Leroy. 2009. Formal verification of a realistic compiler. Commun. ACM 52, 7 (July 2009), 107–115. https://doi.org/10.1145/1538788.
1538814
[15] Soo Yee Lim, Tanya Prasad, Xueyuan Han, and Thomas Pasquier.
2024. SafeBPF: Hardware-assisted Defense-in-depth for eBPF Kernel Extensions. In Proceedings of the 2024 on Cloud Computing Security Workshop (Salt Lake City, UT, USA) (CCSW ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 80–94. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3689938.3694781
[16] Linux kernel contributors. 2026. BPF Kernel Functions (kfuncs).
https://docs.kernel.org/bpf/kfuncs.html. Linux kernel documentation. Accessed: 2026-06-10.
[17] Nuno P. Lopes, Juneyoung Lee, Chung-Kil Hur, Zhengyang Liu, and
John Regehr. 2021. Alive2: Bounded Translation Validation for LLVM.
In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI ’21). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 65–79. https://doi.org/10.1145/3453483.3454030
[18] Hongyi Lu, Shuai Wang, Yechang Wu, Wanning He, and Fengwei Zhang. 2024. MOAT: Towards Safe BPF Kernel Extension. In
33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24). USENIX Association, Philadelphia, PA, 1153–1170. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/usenixsecurity24/presentation/lu-hongyi
[19] Jinsong Mao, Hailun Ding, Juan Zhai, and Shiqing Ma. 2024. Merlin: Multi-tier Optimization of eBPF Code for Performance and Compactness. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 3 (La Jolla, CA, USA) (ASPLOS ’24). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 639–653. https:

Conclusion

We presented Kops, a mechanism that extends the eBPF
compilation pipeline with new operations the kernel JIT
emits directly. Each operation has a proof sequence that the
existing verifier checks on every load and a native emit that
the CPU runs. Beyond the generic enforcement core, the
native emit is the only per-operation addition to the trusted
base. With Kops, we built EInsn, a set of seven hardwareidiom operations. Lean 4 proofs show that each EInsn native
emit has the same eBPF-visible effect as its proof sequence.
EInsn speeds up eBPF microbenchmarks by up to 24% on
x86-64 and 22% on ARM64 over the unmodified pipeline,
recovering up to 42% of the gap to native code, and improves
production application throughput by up to 12%. A new
operation now ships as a kernel module, and the existing
verifier analysis stays untouched.

References
[1] Amazon Web Services. 2024. LNSym: Armv8 Native Code Symbolic
Simulator in Lean. https://github.com/leanprover/LNSym. Accessed:
2026-06-09.
[2] Aqua Security. 2026. Tracee: Runtime Security and Forensics using
eBPF. https://github.com/aquasecurity/tracee. Accessed: 2026-04-06.
[3] bpftrace Authors. 2019. bpftrace: High-level Tracing Language for
Linux. https://github.com/bpftrace/bpftrace. Accessed: 2026-06-09.
[4] Marco Spaziani Brunella, Giacomo Belocchi, Marco Bonola, Salvatore Pontarelli, Giuseppe Siracusano, Giuseppe Bianchi, Aniello Cammarano, Alessandro Palumbo, Luca Petrucci, and Roberto Bifulco.
2020. hXDP: Efficient Software Packet Processing on FPGA NICs.
In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20). USENIX Association, Virtual Event, 973–990.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/brunella
[5] Cilium Authors. 2024. Cilium: eBPF-based Networking, Observability,
and Security. https://cilium.io. Accessed: 2026-04-06.

11

//doi.org/10.1145/3620666.3651387
[20] Meta. 2018. Katran: A high performance layer 4 load balancer. https:
//github.com/facebookincubator/katran. Accessed: 2026-04-06.
[21] Microsoft. 2026. eBPF for Windows. https://github.com/microsoft/
ebpf-for-windows. Accessed: 2026-04-06.
[22] George C. Necula. 1997. Proof-carrying code. In Proceedings of the
24th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming
Languages (Paris, France) (POPL ’97). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 106–119. https://doi.org/10.1145/263699.
263712
[23] Luke Nelson, Jacob Van Geffen, Emina Torlak, and Xi Wang. 2020.
Specification and Verification in the Field: Applying Formal Methods
to BPF Just-in-Time Compilers in the Linux Kernel. In 14th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
20). USENIX Association, Virtual Event, 41–61. https://www.usenix.
org/conference/osdi20/presentation/nelson
[24] Hao Sun and Zhendong Su. 2025. Prove It to the Kernel: Precise
Extension Analysis via Proof-Guided Abstraction Refinement. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles (Lotte Hotel World, Seoul, Republic of Korea) (SOSP ’25).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 736–751.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3731569.3764796
[25] Dave Thaler. 2024. BPF Instruction Set Architecture (ISA). RFC 9669.
https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC9669
[26] Jacob Van Geffen, Luke Nelson, Isil Dillig, Xi Wang, and Emina Torlak.
2020. Synthesizing JIT Compilers for In-Kernel DSLs. In Computer
Aided Verification: 32nd International Conference, CAV 2020, Los Angeles,
CA, USA, July 21–24, 2020, Proceedings, Part II (Los Angeles, CA, USA).
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 564–586. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-53291-8_29
[27] Harishankar Vishwanathan, Matan Shachnai, Srinivas Narayana, and
Santosh Nagarakatte. 2023. Verifying the Verifier: eBPF Range Analysis Verification. In Computer Aided Verification: 35th International
Conference, CAV 2023, Paris, France, July 17–22, 2023, Proceedings,
Part III (Paris, France). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 226–251.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37709-9_12
[28] Xi Wang, David Lazar, Nickolai Zeldovich, Adam Chlipala, and Zachary
Tatlock. 2014. Jitk: A Trustworthy In-Kernel Interpreter Infrastructure. In 11th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 14). USENIX Association, Broomfield, CO, 33–
47. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi14/technical-sessions/
presentation/wang_xi
[29] Yiming Xiang, Wanning He, Mehbubul Hasan Al-Quvi, Emmett
Witchel, and Ryan Huang. 2025. ePass: A Framework for Enhancing Flexibility and Runtime Safety of eBPF Programs. Linux Plumbers
Conference (LPC). https://lpc.events/event/19/contributions/2179/
[30] Qiongwen Xu, Michael D. Wong, Tanvi Wagle, Srinivas Narayana,
and Anirudh Sivaraman. 2021. Synthesizing safe and efficient kernel extensions for packet processing. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
SIGCOMM 2021 Conference (Virtual Event, USA) (SIGCOMM ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 50–64.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3452296.3472929
[31] Shenghao Yuan, Frédéric Besson, Jean-Pierre Talpin, Samuel Hym,
Koen Zandberg, and Emmanuel Baccelli. 2022. End-to-End Mechanized
Proof of an eBPF Virtual Machine for Micro-controllers. In Computer
Aided Verification: 34th International Conference, CAV 2022, Haifa, Israel,
August 7–10, 2022, Proceedings, Part II (Haifa, Israel). Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 293–316. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-131882_15
[32] Yusheng Zheng, Tong Yu, Yiwei Yang, Yanpeng Hu, Xiaozheng Lai, Dan
Williams, and Andi Quinn. 2025. Extending Applications Safely and
Efficiently. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 25). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 557–
574. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi25/presentation/zheng-

yusheng
[33] Qian Zhu, Yuxuan Liu, Ziyuan Zhu, Shangqing Liu, and Lei Bu. 2025.
EPSO: A Caching-Based Efficient Superoptimizer for BPF Bytecode. In
2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE) (Seoul, Korea, Republic of). IEEE Press, Piscataway,
NJ, USA, 2945–2956. https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE63991.2025.00242

12

Load Time
C

LLVM

BPF

BPF Verifier

BPF JIT

Run Time
Process

Hook

x86

Figure 4. The original eBPF pipeline (orange) and the Kops pipeline (green). The original pipeline verifies and JIT-compiles
the bytecode unchanged, producing under-optimized native code. With Kops, the compile-time recognizer rewrites supported
operations into extended instructions, and the EInsn modules supply each operation’s proof sequence to the verifier and its
native emit to the JIT, producing optimized native code.
13

geomean 1.24x
0.83x 0.80x

sip

bitm

ap
has
h
bou
str nds
_se
arc
h
sys
c
cal all
l_fa
nou
t
kat
ran
5tu
p
tet le
rag
on
vla
n
cks
u
tc_ m
cks
um
fiel
d
run
qla
toe t
plit
z
soc
k_l
tcp b
con
n
ote
l
ct_
nat
htt
p
pol
icy
tra
ce_
sw
bin fnv
_se
arc
h
cgr
oup
bitf
ie
me ld
mc
mp

Speedup over stock

2.5x 2.27x
2x
1.74x 1.64x 1.64x
1.53x 1.49x 1.47x 1.45x 1.45x 1.36x
1.5x
1x
0.5x
0x

2.5x
2x
1.5x
1x
0.5x
0x

1.90x

1.56x

1.69x 1.62x

1.34x

1.62x

1.48x

str nds
_se
arc
h
sys
c
cal all
l_fa
nou
t
kat
ran
5tu
p
tet le
rag
on
vla
n
cks
u
tc_ m
cks
um
fiel
d
run
qla
toe t
plit
z
soc
k_l
tcp b
con
n
ote
l
ct_
nat
htt
p
pol
icy
tra
ce_
sw
bin fnv
_se
arc
h
cgr
oup
bitf
ie
me ld
mc
mp

geomean 1.22x

bou

has

sip

bitm

h

0.86x

ap

Speedup over stock

(a) x86-64 KVM EInsn-enabled run.

(b) ARM64 AWS EInsn-enabled run.

Figure 5. Microbenchmark execution-time speedup over the stock kernel eBPF JIT. Each benchmark is measured with three
samples and INNER_REPEAT=100000; bars report speedup computed from median exec_ns, and higher is better. Panel (a)
reports the x86-64 KVM EInsn-enabled run. Panel (b) reports the ARM64 AWS EInsn-enabled run over the 27 benchmarks
with applied EInsn sites. Red lines mark the geomean speedup reported in each panel.

14

