arXiv:2309.04011v2 [cs.AR] 22 Jun 2026

CXLMemUring: A Hardware Software Co-design
Paradigm for Asynchronous and Flexible Parallel CXL
Memory Pool Access
Yiwei Yang

Yusheng Zheng

Kexin Chu

UC Santa Cruz
USA
yyang363@ucsc.edu

UC Santa Cruz
USA
yzhen165@ucsc.edu

University of Connecticut
USA
kexin.chu@uconn.edu

Jianchang Su

Jesun Firoz

Andi Quinn

University of Connecticut
USA
jianchang.su@uconn.edu

Pacific Northwest National Lab
USA
jesun.firoz@pnnl.gov

UC Santa Cruz
USA
aquinn1@ucsc.edu

Abstract

CCS Concepts

CXL-attached memory gives servers a practical path to larger
• Computer systems organization → Heterogeneous
memory capacities while preserving the familiar load/store
(hybrid) systems; • Software and its engineering → Justprogramming model. Its cost is latency: CXL accesses are
in-time compilers; Runtime environments.
too slow for conventional CPU mechanisms to hide reliably,
especially through dependent address-generation chains, yet
Keywords
too fast for traditional software mechanisms such as conCompiler, CXL, Hardware-Software Co-Design
text switches or interrupt-driven asynchrony to manage at
individual-load granularity. Our measurements on a real
Granite Rapids CXL platform show the impact of this la1 Introduction
tency gap: placing GAPBS graph workloads in CXL memory
CXL-attached memory is becoming a practical way to expand
slows execution by 2.44× on average relative to local DRAM,
server memory capacity without abandoning the load/store
and a state-of-the-art software prefetcher still leaves a 2.21×
programming model. A CXL memory expander can appear
slowdown.
to software as an additional NUMA node, allowing systems
This paper presents CXLMemUring, a hardware/software
to place large working sets outside socket-local DRAM while
co-designed system that hides CXL latency by using larger
preserving ordinary pointer-based application code [9, 35].
units of software-managed asynchrony. CXLMemUring forms
This model is attractive for graph analytics [4], databases [2],
hoists: portions of the original program that combine one
scientific workloads [31], language-model serving [24], and
or more CXL-resident memory operations with the nearby
other applications whose data footprints continue to grow
address-generation and memory-orchestration logic needed
faster than per-socket DRAM capacity.
to execute them. The host CPU invokes these hoists asynThe cost of this capacity is latency. CXL memory occupies
chronously on a near-memory accelerator deployed on a
an
awkward middle ground between local DRAM and tradicommodity CXL Type 2 FPGA, then continues useful comtional
remote storage or network access. It is much slower
putation while the device runs ahead to prepare future acthan
an
LLC hit or local DRAM access, so the CPU’s hardcesses. A compiler identifies candidate hoists from unmodiware
latency-hiding
mechanisms—out-of-order execution,
fied source programs, and an online JIT refines region boundmiss
status
holding
registers,
hardware prefetchers, and deep
aries and execution parameters based on workload-specific
pipelines—often
cannot
look
far enough ahead, especially
behavior.
when
each
address
depends
on
the result of a previous reWe implement CXLMemUring as a prototype compiler,
mote
load.
At
the
same
time,
CXL
latency is far shorter than
runtime, and Vortex-based CXL-side accelerator. Across GAPBS,
the
latency
for
which
conventional
software-managed asynMCF, Spatter, and NAS Parallel Benchmark workloads, CXLMemUrchrony
was
designed.
Threads,
coroutines,
interrupts, and
ing improves end-to-end performance by 1.45–1.75× (1.59×
context
switches
are
too
expensive
to
deploy
around indigeometric mean) over native CXL-memory execution.
vidual CXL loads. CXL memory therefore falls into a latency
“uncanny valley”[3]: hardware mechanisms are too narrow

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Kexin Chu, Jianchang Su, Jesun Firoz, and Andi Quinn

to hide the latency, but traditional software mechanisms are
too coarse.
Most existing CXL software stacks respond to this problem
by improving placement. Page placement [30], page migration [45], and tier management [46] systems try to keep hot
pages in local DRAM and move colder pages to CXL memory.
These mechanisms are valuable, but they optimize where
data resides rather than what happens when a critical access
to CXL memory remains. Host-side prefetching attacks the
same latency from a different direction, but it remains constrained by the host program’s exposed lookahead and by
dependent address-generation chains [15]. For many applications, the bottleneck is not that all data is poorly placed;
it is that the next useful address is discovered only after the
current CXL miss returns.
Our measurements show that this problem is both large
and structurally diverse. On a real Granite Rapids CXL platform, placing GAPBS graph workloads in CXL memory slows
execution by an average of 2.44× relative to local DRAM.
Adding a state-of-the-art software prefetcher, APT-GET [15],
reduces this only slightly, leaving a 2.21× slowdown. We further study the problem to show the large number of memorybased stalls, the cost of memory indirection, and that memory boundedness varies across workloads even within an
application.
This paper proposes a solution to CXL’s high memory
latency based upon the following key insight: rather than
use an individual far-memory load as the unit for softwaremanaged asynchrony, we should combine such loads with
nearby dependencies to form regions that are large enough
to amortize management overhead. Such a region might compute the load’s address and follow nearby pointer or index dependencies can be large enough to manage asynchronously.
We call such a unit a hoist: a portion of the original program
that contains one or more CXL-resident memory operations
and the address-generation or memory-orchestration logic
needed to execute them.
We design a new system, CXLMemUring, that provides a
solution to high CXL memory latency by exploiting hoists.
CXLMemUring is a hardware-software co-designed solution
that uses software managed asychrony to hide high CXL
memory latency. CXLMemUring deploys a near-memory execution accelerator alongside CXL-attached memory which
computes the hoists that the system invokes asynchronously.
The system provides a runtime API that allows the host CPU
and hardware accelerator to coordinate and synchronize for
correct behavior. This split execution model turns isolated
CXL stalls into overlapped host/device work: while the host
consumes one prepared value or performs non-memorybound computation, the device runs ahead on address generation and cache preparation for future accesses.

CXLMemUring is guided by two design goals. First, CXLMemUring aims for transparency: a developer should be able to compile an unmodified application and let the system identify
profitable hoists. This is essential because the motivating
workloads expose many different bottleneck shapes, and
manually rewriting each application around a new device
programming model would defeat the purpose of using CXL
as coherent memory. To support transparency, CXLMemUring uses a compiler-based approach to split an unmodified
source program into regions. Deciding on the appropriate
hoists is difficult: overly small hoists struggle to hide management overhead while overly large hoists require too much
computation to happen on a relatively weak hardware accelerator. CXLMemUring uses a data-flow based algorithm
inspired by program slicing to create initial hoists and uses
an online just-in-time compiler to refine and optimize its
hoist decisions based upon workload-specific behavior.
CXLMemUring’s second design goal is commodity support, meaning that CXLMemUring should work without
requiring custom ASICs or modifications to the host CPU.
To ensure commodity support, CXLMemUring’s hardware
accelerator is deployed on an existing CXL Type 2 device,
namely a CXL Agilex 7 FPGA, rather than on a custom ASIC.
In addition, CXLMemUring’s host-side implementation is
entirely written as a software layer that requires no special
features from the host CPU.
We implement CXLMemUring as a prototype compiler
and runtime stack. The compiler adds approximately 12,000
lines of C++ to MLIR. It supports programs written and
compiled through Clang [26], TOSA [28], and SCF [27]. The
system implements an eight-thread Vortex SIMT cores as
its hardware accelerator [25]. Its runtime implements the
system’s coordination and synchronization using a CXLbacked shared queue.
We evaluate CXLMemUring on benchmarks from GAPBS [4],
MCF, Spatter [22], and the NASA Parallel Benchmark [31]
workloads. We observe that CXLMemUring improves endto-end performance by 1.45–1.75× (1.59× geometric mean)
over native CXL memory performance. We also analyze
CXLMemUring’s desgin decisions and compare alternative
policies for deciding how to form hoists from a program.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:

• hoists as a unit of software-managed asynchrony that are
large enough to amortize synchronization overhead.
• CXLMemUring, a transparent and commodity-supported
hardware/software codesigned system that uses software
managed asychrony to hide CXL memory latency.
• An evaluation of CXLMemUring that shows that it improves application performance on CXL-memory machines
by up to a factor of 1.75.

CXLMemUring : A Hardware Software Co-design Paradigm for Asynchronous and Flexible Parallel CXL Memory
Conference’17,
Pool Access
July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

2.2

bfs

pr

61.40s

218.2s

28.10s

2.44×
2.21×

APT-GET

bc

cc_sv

1.00×

Compute Express Link (CXL) is an open interconnect built
on top of PCIe that gives processors a cache-coherent path
to attached devices and device memory regions [9, 35]. CXL
supports memory expansion through Type 3 devices, which
expose device memory to the host. Operating systems manage the CXL memory and expose it as a NUMA node to applications, which allows applications to allocate large working
sets to the CXL memory. Applications use the same load/store programming model to access CXL memory as it uses
for local DRAM. This effectively allows software to grow
its memory capacity beyond socket-local memory capacity without requiring software modifications that are often
required to support non-socket memory (e.g., RDMA, I/O
interfaces, etc.).
CXL also defines interfaces that allow devices to participate in the host CPU’s memory coherency through Type 2
devices. These devices can issue device-to-host coherency
requests through a device coherence agent.
CXL’s cost is latency. A CXL memory access uses ordinary
load/store semantics, but a miss to CXL-attached memory
must traverse the CXL link and device path before the host
can consume the data. This latency is much larger than a
local DRAM access.

CXL

163.1s

CXL Primer

4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

104.8s

CXL-attached memory increases memory capacity and enables new forms of disaggregated memory, but it also exposes
applications to remote-memory latency that is not hidden
well by existing page-placement or prefetching mechanisms.

2.1

Host

Background and Motivation
Normalized runtime
(Host = 1.0)

2

pr_spmv

GeoMean

Figure 1: GAPBS performance on baseline systems

memory node. CXL+ APT-GET keeps data in CXL memory
and adds APT-GET [15] host prefetch insertion, representing an existing state-of-the-art approach for hiding memory
latency from the CPU side.
Results. We measure the latency of each benchmark under
each of the configurations and plot the results in fig. 1. Across
the GAPBS kernels, moving data from local DRAM to CXL
memory imposes a slowdown of an average of 2.44×. The
core issue is that the graph processing workloads’ irregular
graph traversals repeatedly place remote CXL accesses on
the critical path.
APT-GET’s host prefetching does not make much impact
on this gap; APT-GET retains a slowdown of 2.21× compared
to using local DRAM. The core issue is that APT-GET’s software prefetching approach cannot prefetch far enough ahead
to hide the high CXL memory latency because the pointerchasing operations in the benchmarks are too tightly packed
for software prefetching to be effective.

Evaluating systems with CXL Memory

We first measure how applications perform when their data
is placed in CXL memory. Our goal is to quantify the application impact of CXL placement and to test whether an
existing host-side latency-hiding technique is sufficient.
Experimental Setup. We use a real CXL platform with an
Intel Xeon 6 6787P host, 256 GB of local DDR5-8000, and
CXL Agilex 7 FPGA with 16GB of DDR4 and a delay buffer
imposing a memory latency of 1us. The CXL module is enumerated by platform firmware as a CPU-less NUMA node.
For the CXL configuration, benchmarks are launched with
numactl and bound to the CXL node, so their allocations
reside on the CXL module while CPU placement is held
fixed. We use the graph workloads from the GAP Benchmark
Suite [5] because their irregular traversals and dependent
updates are a common stress case for far-memory systems;
we configure the experiments to use a graph with 220 vertices.
We compare three configurations. DRAM places workload
data in local DDR memory. CXL places the data in the CXL

2.3 Understanding Bottlenecks When using
CXL Memory
We next study why CXL-resident applications slow down.
Experimental Setup. This analysis uses the same Granite
Rapids CXL platform as above and adds two analysis tools.
First, we use Intel VTune Top-Down Microarchitecture Analysis (TMA) to measure where CPU pipeline slots are lost
when allocations are bound to the CXL memory node. TMA
classifies issue slots into frontend, bad speculation, retiring,
and backend categories; the backend category is further split
into core-bound and memory-bound behavior. Second, we
use a cycle-level gem5 model to isolate pointer-chasing cost
under controlled access patterns. The gem5 study lets us
hold the remote-memory path fixed while changing only the
amount of address metadata that must be fetched before a
useful access can issue. For Vtune, we use selected benchmarks from 3 benchmark suites: is and gc from the NAS Parallel Benchmarks [31]; bc and pr from GAPBS [5]; partitioned

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Kexin Chu, Jianchang Su, Jesun Firoz, and Andi Quinn

Table 1: TMA Top-Down Microarchitecture Summary.
All percentages are of pipeline slots.

Benchmark

Hotspot
Instruction

is
gc
bc
pr
Hash-Join PRH
Hash-Join PRO
UME GZP
UME GZPI
Spatter

RMW A[B[i]]
LD A[B[j]]
RMW A[B[j]] cond
RMW A[B[j]]
ST A[B[f(C[i])]]
ST A[B[f(C[i])]]
RMW A[B[i]] cond
LD A[B[C[j]]] cond
ST A[B[i]]

Backend
Bound

Memory
Bound

Verdict

78.1%
59.9%
74.2%
78.7%
57.4%
63.5%
70.6%
69.9%
72.8%

64.5%
39.5%
62.2%
65.0%
38.6%
42.2%
33.9%
41.7%
31.1%

Memory
Memory
Memory
Memory
Memory
Memory
Mem+Core
Memory
Mem+Core

Table 3: MonetDB TPC-H per-query hotspot analysis
at SF=1 on Granite Rapids. Percentages are of total
CPU time (kernel spinlock cycles from 172-thread contention excluded).
Query

Function 1

Function 2

Function 3

Q1 (Agg)
Q5 (Join+Filter)
Q6 (Scan/Filter)
Q9 (Join+Agg)
Q11 (Join+Agg)
Q13 (String+Group)
Q16 (Group+Sort)
Q18 (Join+Agg)
Q22 (Join+String)

BATgroupavg3 (25.0%)
hashjoin (6.9%)
scanselect (17.1%)
hashjoin (31.4%)
hashjoin (58.9%)
BATgroup_internal (16.2%)
BATgroup_internal (16.9%)
dosum (18.1%)
hashjoin (53.8%)

dosum (11.2%)
scanselect (3.2%)
canditer_next (1.5%)
canditer_next (3.9%)
canditer_next (8.0%)
__strstr (15.7%)
GDKqsort (4.4%)
BATgroup_internal (14.1%)
UTF8_strtail (5.0%)

project1_lng (9.5%)
mergejoin_lng (2.8%)
–
–
thetajoin (1.6%)
PCRElikeselect (5.3%)
__strcmp_evex (5.3%)
–
scanselect (3.7%)

Source Program
CIRA Compiler

Table 2: Throughput results of microbenchmarks in a
gem5 simulator

Mode
direct load (*ptr)
indirect load (*A[i])
doubly-indirect load (*A[B[i]])

Throughput
(instructions/us)
0.50
0.26
0.17

Compile Time

Slowdown
vs. direct
1.00×
1.91×
2.94×

Host Binary

Region Binary

CIRA JIT

Device Runtime
Execution Accelerator

Host Runtime

hash-join kernels [39]; GZP and GZPI from the UME benchmark suite [13]; and Spatter gather/scatter accesses [22].
Together these workloads cover sequential streams, single
indirection, double indirection, read-modify-write updates,
and conditional irregular accesses.

Host CPU

(Vortex RISC-V SIMT)
CXL

Host System

CXL
Memory

CXL-attached
FPGA

Device

Runtime

Figure 2: CXLMemUring’s architecture.
Results. We provide the key results from top down analysis
in Table 1. Every listed kernel loses at least 30% of pipeline
slots to memory stalls, while is, bc, and pr each lose more
than 60%. The affected code is not limited to one benchmark family: graph analytics, sparse numerical kernels, hash
joins, unstructured meshes, and gather/scatter kernels all
expose substantial memory stalls. VTune reports that memory is the key bottleneck for all applications but two, where
it reports that both Core and Memory lead to many stalls.
Moreover, VTune reports indirect memory accesses as the
hotspot instruction, i.e., the instruction that accounts for the
most overhead, for each of the benchmarks.
We further explore the cost of irregular memory accesses
on CXL memory systems by using the gem5 simulator. We implement microbenchmarks that repeatedly issue direct load
instructions, indirect instructions, and doubly indirect instructions. Table 2 shows the throughput of each microbenchmark as well as the throughput slowdown relative to direct
loads. We observe that adding a layer of indirection—i.e., a
single indirect load compared to a direct load—halves the
throughput of the microbenchmark; a doubly indirect load
adds similar overhead.
Lastly, we explore the variance in memory bottlenecks
when we vary the workloads for a given application. We

randomly select candidate queries from TPC-H and execute
them over MonetDB [14] deployed on the Granite Rapids
CXL platform. We configure the experiment to use scale
factor 1. We use VTune to determine the most expensive
functions when running each of the queries; table 3 reports
the top three functions for each query (it only shows two if
the third function represents less than 1% of execution time).
We observe that the dominant function varies considerably
accross queries, suggesting that memory bottlenecks are
workload dependent.

3

CIRA Design

CXLMemUring is a new system for software-managed asynchrony for hiding CXL memory latency. CXLMemUring’s
key insight is that the benefits of software-managed asynchrony—
i.e., support for larger windows of asynchronous operations—
are necessary to hide memory latency at the magnitude of
CXL memory, while the costs of software-managed asynchrony—
i.e., high overhead—are manageable by performing groups
of operations asynchronously instead of a single load operation. CXLMemUring calls such groups of operations a hoist
(section 3.2). CXLMemUring enables hoists by deploying a

CXLMemUring : A Hardware Software Co-design Paradigm for Asynchronous and Flexible Parallel CXL Memory
Conference’17,
Pool Access
July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

near-memory execution accelerator alongside CXL-attached
memory (section 3.1). Choosing appropriate hoists from a
program is challenging; CXLMemUring uses a multi-staged
approach including a custom compiler and dynamic optimizer to optimize hoist selection (section 3.5 and section 3.6).
CXLMemUring’s design is guided by two design goals.
First, CXLMemUring aims for transparency, meaning that
a developer can use CXLMemUring without modifying the
application. Transparency is a standard goal in prior systems
for hiding high-latency memory and storage operations, including far-memory runtimes, asynchronous prefetching systems, and transparent memory-tiering frameworks [16, 29,
30, 34], so CXLMemUring retains this goal. Second, CXLMemUring aims for commodity support, meaning that CXLMemUring should work without requiring custom ASICs or modifications to the host CPU.

3.1

System Architecture

Figure 2 shows the CXLMemUring architecture. The system comprises four main components: the CXLMemUring
hardware consists of a near-memory execution accelerator
designed to run on commodity CXL Type 2 FPGA devices
deployed alongside CXL-attached memory; its approach
ensures commodity support. The CXLMemUring runtime
consists of software that executes on both the accelerator
and the CPU host to implement the CXLMemUring API
and coordinate communication between the two sides. The
CXLMemUring compiler is responsible for compiling a program to split it into hoists and use CXLMemUring’s runtime
system to accelerate CXL-attached memory accesses. Finally,
the CXLMemUring JIT dynamically optimizes a running
process to maximize the benefit of asynchronous actions,
adapting hoist selection and parameters to observed runtime
behavior.
The remainder of this section describes CXLMemUring’s
key components. Figure 3 provides an example program
that uses the CXLMemUring API. The original program
(fig. 3a) is a linked-list traversal that calls a function, foo, on
every element of the linked list. CXLMemUring converts the
program into two separate components, one that executes
on the host CPU (fig. 4a) and one consisting of a hoist that
executes on the device (fig. 4b).

1 Node

*node = head;
(node) {
foo(node->data);
node = node->next;

2 while
3
4
5 }

(a) Original Program.
1 host_side(head)

{
buf = cira_alloc(sizeof(Value));
db = cira_doorbell_alloc();
node = head;
cira_hoist_exec(hoist, node, buf, db);
while (node) {
cira_doorbell_wait(db);
foo(*buf);
cira_doorbell_ring(db);
}
cira_free(buf);

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12 }

(b) Host portion of the traversal using CXLMemUring API
1 hoist(host,

buf, db) {
while (node) {
*buf = node->data;
node = node->next;
cira_doorbell_ring(db);
cira_doorbell_wait(db);
}

2
3
4
5
6
7
8 }

(c) hoist for the traversal using CXLMemUring API

Figure 3: An example linked list program.

Table 4: CIRA API
Operation

Description

cira_hoist_exec(fxn,
...)
p = cira_alloc(size)

Execute fxn on the device, passing all optional arguments.
Allocate a buffer of size bytes in
CXL memory.
Free pointer, p, from CXL memory.
Allocate a doorbell for synchronization between host and device.
Pause execution until the other
side rings the doorbell.
Wake the other side of the doorbell.

cira_free(p)
d =
cira_doorbell_alloc()
cira_doorbell_wait(d)
cira_doorbell_ring(d)

3.2

The CIRA API

We describe the key features and components of the CXLMemUring API; table 4 provides a summary of the operations that
critical sections. Otherwise, they can include arbitrary code
make up the API.
from the original application. The host invokes a hoist by
Hoist. CXLMemUring’s API is to support hoists. A hoist
executing the cira_hoist_exec function with a pointer
is a portion of the original program that CXLMemUring
to the region and any optional arguments. For example, line 5
offloads and executes on its execution accelerator. Hoists
in fig. 4a shows how the linked list host program initiates
are pure functions (i.e., side-effect free) and cannot cross
the hoist for the linked list traversal example.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Kexin Chu, Jianchang Su, Jesun Firoz, and Andi Quinn

Memory management. CXLMemUring provides APIs for
CXL-memory allocation through cira_alloc and release
through cira_free. In addition to using these APIs to
store application data, CXLMemUring’s memory management provides a mechanism to create objects that are visible
to both the host and device 1 . The programming model is
simple: the host allocates a buffer for shared data and passes
the pointer of the buffer to the hoist that it wishes to share
with. For example, lines 2 and 11 in fig. 4a show how the example host program uses these functions to allocate and free
a buffer for communicating values to and from the device.

profile-guided batching described above expose this concurrency: pointer-chasing and graph-traversal kernels can run
ahead across multiple nodes, frontiers, or batched requests,
issuing many outstanding CXL.cache accesses and switching
among lightweight threads when individual accesses stall.
In this setting, high SIMT concurrency converts otherwise
serialized host stalls into overlapped device-side memorylevel parallelism, while the low per-core clock rate is largely
hidden by the memory-bound nature of the workload.

3.4

CIRA Software Runtime

CXLMemUring’s software runtime implements the CXLMemUrDoorbells. CXLMemUring provides a doorbell API to
ing API by coordinating a host runtime library with a small
support synchronization between the host and device. A prodevice-side service loop.
gram allocates a doorbell with the API call in Table 4. Calling
The CXLMemUring runtime coordinates hoist execution
cira_doorbell_wait causes the calling context (host
through
a shared queue in CXL memory. When host code
or device) to pause execution, while calling cira_doorbell_ring
calls
cira_hoist_exec,
the runtime packages the sefrom one context wakes up the other. Rings to a doorbell
lected
hoist
identifier
and
its
arguments
into a task descriptor
are stateful: if the other context is not currently waiting, its
and
appends
that
descriptor
to
the
queue.
The device runtime
next wait will not pause. Rings are also coalesced: two rings
polls
the
queue,
removes
ready
descriptors,
and dispatches
without an intervening wait have the same effect as one ring.
the
corresponding
hoist
on
the
Vortex
cores.
For example, the linked-list host and device programs use a
The CXLMemUring runtime provides its memory-management
doorbell (db) to safely synchronize accesses to the shared
APIs
using conventional allocator machinery over CXL-backed
buf variable: the host waits on line 7 before consuming
memory,
rather than a custom object system.
buf and rings the doorbell on line 9 after it is done, while
CXLMemUring
implements doorbells as small shared synthe device rings on line 5 after producing buf and waits on
chronization
objects.
Each doorbell records whether the host
line 6 before overwriting it.
or device has already rung it and whether either side is
currently waiting. A call to cira_doorbell_wait polls
3.3 CIRA Hardware
this state until the corresponding ring is visible; a call to
CXLMemUring deploys a near-memory execution acceleracira_doorbell_ring updates the state so the peer’s
tor to execute hoists. The system uses commodity FPGA hardcurrent or next wait can proceed. The runtime inserts the
ware for the accelerator, implemented on an Intel Agilex 7
necessary CXL coherency operations around these polling
FPGA [17]. Rather than modifying the host CPU [37, 42]
loads and state updates so that data written before a ring is
or introducing a custom host-device interface [6, 18, 21],
visible to the peer after its wait returns. Thus, the doorbell
CXLMemUring uses CXL as the communication substrate.
API gives generated host and device code a simple synchroIn particular, the FPGA is exposed as a Type 2 CXL device,
nization abstraction while the runtime handles the low-level
allowing the accelerator to participate in the host cohersharing details.
ence domain and access CXL-resident data through standard
coherent memory operations.
3.5 CIRA Compiler
CXLMemUring employs Vortex RISC-V single-instruction
multiple-thread (SIMT) cores [10] as its execution substrate.
The CXLMemUring compiler converts traditional applicaAlthough these cores run at a much lower clock frequency
tion code into coordinated host and device programs that
than the host CPU, this is a good match for CXLMemUring
use the CXLMemUring API to coordinate and share state.
because hoists are dominated by remote-memory latency
The key task for the compiler is to determine what hoists
rather than scalar compute throughput. Our intuition is that
to make from the original program. CXLMemUring solves
the goal is not to make one dependence chain execute faster
this task through a slicing-based program analysis that aims
instruction-by-instruction, but to keep many independent
to balance hoist size: it ensures that hoists are large enough
address-generation and prefetch contexts in flight while the
so that they overcome the overhead of its software manhost performs useful work. The compiler-formed regions and
agement. However, CXLMemUring also must ensure not
to place too much computation in hoists, since hoist logic
1 CXLMemUring’s hardware setup does not allow the device to access the
executes on the execution accelerator, which is significantly
host’s DRAM.
less powerful than the host CPU.

CXLMemUring : A Hardware Software Co-design Paradigm for Asynchronous and Flexible Parallel CXL Memory
Conference’17,
Pool Access
July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

The CXLMemUring compiler first compiles the program
to produce the MLIR. The CXLMemUring compiler first
identifies all candidate hoist points. The system considers
all loads from CXL memory that occur within a loop as
candidate hoist points. Loads from CXL memory are precisely
the instructions whose latency CXLMemUring aims to hide,
while focusing on those that occur in loops ensures that the
created hoists will be of high impact.
Next, the CXLMemUring compiler expands each candidate load to grow the hoist and amortize the overhead of
software management. The system starts at the candidate
load instruction and recursively adds all operations that are
necessary to compute the input to the instruction. For example, the system first adds the operations that define the
address operand to the candidate load instruction, then adds
operations that define the inputs to the inputs to the address
operand, and so on. It stops the recursion and chooses to
treat an operand as an input to the hoist if one of the following conditions holds: 1. CXLMemUring cannot execute
the candidate instruction, 2. CXLMemUring’s recursion has
reached the start of the function that contains the original
candidate load, 3. CXLMemUring’s recursion would cross a
synchronization operation (i.e., adding the instruction would
cause the hoist to cross a critical section boundary), 4. the
candidate instruction is invariant with the loop, or 5. the
candidate instruction belongs to a basic block that is not currently in the hoist and the branch predicate of the new basic
block cannot be safely added to the hoist due to any of these
reasons. As the final step in expansion, the CXLMemUring
compiler adds as many other CXL loads to the hoist as it can.
It identifies all of the uses of each of the instructions in the
hoist and adds any such uses that are CXL memory loads
and are not currently in the hoist.
To create the host-side, the CXLMemUring compiler attempts to remove all instructions from the hoist. Note that it
may decide to leave hoist instructions in the host program,
thereby duplicating the instruction, if the host program includes uses of the hoist instructions.
Finally, the CXLMemUring compiler adds synchronization to both the host program and the hoist to ensure that
the host and device communicate data safely. During this
step, the compiler also ensures that both programs include
the loop that contains the original candidate load.
As an example, consider the original linked list traversal
described in fig. 3a. The first candidate instruction is the load
of the node’s next pointer (i.e., node = node->next).
The compiler identifies the instructions that define the original value of node, which includes either itself (which it
does not need to add) or the initialization of node to head 2 .
2 CXLMemUring operates over LLVM IR, so this actually involves tracing

single static assignment operations and phi nodes

host_side(head) {
hoist(nodes, data, db) {
B=16; db=cira_doorbell_alloc();
B=16; n=nodes[0];
data=cira_alloc(sizeof(Value)*B);
nodes=cira_alloc(sizeof(Node*)*B);
while (n) {
nodes[0]=head; n=head;
for (i=0; i<B && n; i++) {
cira_hoist_exec(hoist,nodes,data,db);
while (n) {
cira_doorbell_wait(db);
n=nodes[0];
for (i=0; n && i<B; i++, n++)
foo(data[i]);
cira_doorbell_ring(db);
}
cira_free(data); cira_free(nodes);
}

(a) Host

data[i]=n->data;
nodes[i]=n;
n=n->next;
}
nodes[0]=n;
cira_doorbell_ring(db);
cira_doorbell_wait(db);
}
}

(b) hoist

Figure 4: The CXLMemUring JIT’s optimized version
of the linked-list traversal in fig. 3.

The compiler does not add the initialization operation because it is loop invariant; instead it creates an input to the
region for the original node value. As the last step in expanding the region, CXLMemUring identifies that the cxl load
(node->data) depends on instructions that are already
contained in the hoist and adds it.

3.6

CIRA JIT

CXLMemUring implements a JIT to adapt and optimize
the hoists for the particular workload that a user executes; the
motivation shows how varied hotspots and optimizations can
be across workloads even within an application (section 2).
The CXLMemUring JIT uses a two-phase approach: a profile
phase uses performance counters to identify performance
bottlenecks as the system operates. Then, an optimization
phase uses those profiles to guide a rule-based optimizer.
The Profiler. The CXLMemUring JIT’s profiling system
uses a hierarchical approach to identify optimization opportunities in the program. At the inner level, the system uses
hardware performance counters on both the host CPU and
the hardware accelerator to track individual memory access
latencies and host CPU cache behavior. At the outer level,
the system identifies program phases with distinct memory
access characteristics, by monitoring the functions in which
the process spends the majority of its time.
The Optimizer. The CXLMemUring optimizer uses the
data from the CXLMemUring profiler to optimize the program. It initiates an optimization either when the profiling
data indicates poor performance (e.g., a low cache hit rate)
or a shift in program phases (e.g., the hot functions in the
program shift). The optimizer includes hysteresis to prevent
the system from over-corrections that would cause it to oscillate between configurations by incorporating an exponential
backoff for optimization attempts that fail.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Kexin Chu, Jianchang Su, Jesun Firoz, and Andi Quinn

When the optimizer decides to optimize a hoist, it has
a number of options. First, it can adjust the operations in
the hoist and the host program to shrink the hoist from the
output produced by the compiler. It shrinks hoists if the
profiling data suggests that the host is frequently stalled
waiting on the device. Second, the optimizer can expand
the region by unrolling loops and using batching. Growing
the batch size has the effect of growing the hoist, which is
useful if the profiling data suggests that the device is frequently waiting for the host. Finally, the optimizer considers
adjusting when the host initiates hoist execution (i.e., calls
cira_hoist_exec) to hide high startup cost.
For example, fig. 4b shows the linked list traversal code optimized by the CXLMemUring JIT. In this case the CXLMemUring JIT used batching to grow the size of the original hoist.

4 Implementation
4.1 Compiler Infrastructure
The implementation of CXLMemUring required approximately 12,000 lines of C++ code added to the MLIR compiler
infrastructure [26], spanning frontend parsing, IR transformations, and backend code generation. CXLMemUring supports three frontend dialects: ClangIR for general C/C++
code, TOSA for tensor computations, or SCF for structured
control-flow kernels [20, 25, 27, 28]. The ClangIR frontend
integration involved extending Clang’s AST visitor patterns
to generate MLIR operations while preserving C++ semantic
information. We implemented custom parsers for TOSA and
SCF dialects that maintain source-level debugging information through the compilation pipeline.
The frontend parsing infrastructure handles modern C++
codebases through a multi-phase translation process. During
the first phase, Clang’s semantic analysis produces an annotated AST with type information, template instantiations,
and implicit conversions made explicit. The second phase
walks this AST to generate ClangIR operations, preserving
the high-level structure of classes, virtual dispatch, and exception handling. The third phase lowers ClangIR to SCF
and standard dialects, converting control flow constructs to
structured operations amenable to analysis. Throughout this
process, we maintain bidirectional mappings between source
locations and IR operations.

4.2

Backend Code Generation

Backend code generation required developing custom LLVM
target descriptions for our heterogeneous architecture. The
x86 backend extensions include 15 new intrinsics for asynchronous memory operations, completion polling, and CXLvisible queue manipulation, mapping to instruction sequences
that interact with our runtime system. The Vortex backend
implements a specialized instruction scheduler that accounts

for CXL memory latency and policy-specific coherence costs
when ordering prefetch operations and distributing work
across warps. During lowering, cira.cache_read and
cira.cache_write are translated into R-Tile requestgenerator commands carrying route and policy bits: CS/CO/NC for reads, NC/CO/NC-P for writes, and plain CXL.mem
loads/stores for H2D accesses. We developed custom register
allocators for both backends that minimize spill traffic to
CXL memory.

4.3

Runtime System

The runtime system follows a distributed design with components executing on both x86 host processors and Vortex accelerator cores. The host-side runtime, implemented as a shared
library, intercepts memory allocation requests and manages
the interface to the Vortex subsystem. The accelerator-side
runtime, compiled into a persistent kernel resident in Vortex memory, processes state-aware prefetch and publication
requests, records the most recent compiler-requested state
for outstanding cache lines, and issues the corresponding
CXL.cache or CXL.mem transactions through the device request path. Communication flows through memory-mapped
queues visible to both processor types.
Memory allocation in CXL memory uses a two-level allocator optimized for pointer-chasing access patterns. The first
level maintains per-thread free lists for small allocations (up
to 4KB), eliminating synchronization overhead. The second
level manages large allocations from a global pool protected
by a readers-writer lock. Both levels align allocations to cache
line boundaries (64 bytes).
Thread management on the Vortex cores follows a workstealing model that balances load across available warps.
Each Vortex core maintains a local work queue of pending
prefetch requests, processing them in approximate priority order. Warp scheduling uses a round-robin policy with
priority boost for requests approaching their deadline.

4.4

Memory Management and Coherence

CXLMemUring does not implement a replacement coherence protocol in software. CXL’s DCOH and the host coherence fabric perform the actual cache-line state transitions. What CXLMemUring maintains is a compiler/runtime
shadow directory of requested state: which lines have outstanding CS/CO/NC-P intent, which futures publish data to
the host, and which Type 2 regions are currently treated
as host-biased or device-biased. This metadata is used for
legality checking, conflict avoidance, and policy selection; it
is not the source of architectural coherence.
The shadow directory is partitioned across Vortex cores,
with each core maintaining entries for a subset of CXL memory addresses. Directory lookups add 2–3 cycles when the

CXLMemUring : A Hardware Software Co-design Paradigm for Asynchronous and Flexible Parallel CXL Memory
Conference’17,
Pool Access
July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Table 5: Workload characteristics. The data size reports
the evaluated input or working-set size used in our
experiments, rather than the benchmark-suite maximum.
Benchmark

Workload Type

Memory Bottleneck

Evaluated Data Size

GAPBS
MCF
Spatter
NPB

Graph processing
Network optimization
Irregular memory access
Scientific computing

Latency
Latency
Latency
Bandwidth

240 MB
345 MB
1 GB
12.8 GB

entry is cached, or approximately 50ns when accessing CXLresident entries. The directory fits entirely in Vortex on-chip
memory for working sets up to 64GB. If a host-visible region is switched to device-bias mode, the runtime inserts an
explicit phase boundary and rejects concurrent host writes
until the region is returned to host-bias mode.

5

Evaluation

We evaluate CXLMemUring with three questions:
• Q1 Does CXLMemUring improve end-to-end performance?
• Q2 What aspects of CXLMemUring’s design contribute
to improved performance?
• Q3 What is the overhead of CXLMemUring’s techniques?
• Q4 How does CXLMemUring’s performance compare to
related work?
Experimental Setup. Our evaluation uses a heterogeneous
CXL platform consisting of an Intel Xeon 6 6787p host with
256 GB DDR5-8000 and a Type 2 Intel Agilex 7 FPGA implementing Vortex RISC-V SIMT cores. We execute each
benchmark with its data placed in the CXL-attached memory region and average the results of 10 trials in all reported
numbers.
Workloads. We evaluate CXLMemUring on four benchmark suites (see table 5). GAPBS [4] is a graph processing
benchmark suite; we configure the workloads to execute over
random graphs with 220 vertices. The GAPBS workloads
perform pointer chasing operations; their performance is
bounded by memory latency. MCF performs a vehicle scheduling planning problem by modeling the problem as a graph
and using a network-simplex algorithm. MCF also exhibits
pointer chasing behavior and is consequently bounded by
memory latency. Spatter is a benchmarking suite for gather
and scatter accesses, which are common in high-performance
computing [22]. Spatter consists of 3 workloads, we configure it to use a 1GiB dataset. Spatter is bounded by memory
latency because gather and scatter accesses are irregular
memory access patterns for which hardware prefetchers
perform poorly. Lastly, we use the NAS parallel benchmark
(NPB) suite [31], which is a collection of 8 scientific computing workloads derived from computational fluid dynamics.

The NPB workloads are bounded by memory bandwidth
because they perform sequential memory accesses.
Baselines. We compare CXLMemUring against three configurations that isolate different aspects of the design: (1)
Host, where execution runs entirely on the host with no
heterogeneous offload. (2) CIRA few shot, which only places
CXL load instructions into the hoist; note: CIRA few shot
allows load instructions that are direct, indirect, or doubly
indirect (i.e., *ptr, *A[i], and *A[B[i]]), but no additional computation (e.g., no control-flow). Finally, (3) CIRA
w/o JIT, which uses the CXLMemUring compiler, but does
not use the CXLMemUring JIT.

5.1

Application Performance

We execute each of the workloads on each of the baselines;
fig. 5 summarizes the results. CXLMemUring achieves a
speedup of 1.45–1.75 × (1.59 × geometric mean). The strongest
gains arise in workloads whose critical path is dominated by
dependent remote accesses, especially graph analytics and
pointer-intensive optimization kernels, such as tc and sssp
from GAPBS and mg from NPB.
We conclude that CXLMemUring improves end-to-end
application performance.

5.2

Understanding CXLMemUring’s
Performance Across Configurations

We answer Q2 by analyzing the performance gap between
prefetch only, CXLMemUring w/o JIT and CXLMemUring.
At a high-level, we observe that CXLMemUring outperforms
each of the other configurations, suggesting that its overall
design contribute to an advantage compared to incomplete
approaches.
However, the intermediate results are surprising. First,
CIRA few shot is quite effective on its own: it achieves a
speedup of between 1.3–1.7× (1.51× geometric mean). The
speedup occurs because CIRA few shot is capable of offloading fairly complex operations, which are evidently expensive enough to amortize the overheads of CXLMemUring’s
software-managed asynchrony. Note that the hoists produced by CIRA few shot are significantly larger than the
asynchronous operations of prior work for commodity systems; e.g., both hardware and software prefetchers only offload direct memory accesses.
Also interestingly, CXLMemUring w/o JIT performs worse
than CIRA few shot. It achieves a speedup of between 1.3–
1.6× (1.43× geometric mean). CXLMemUring w/o JIT places
too many operations in its hoists, so too much of the code executes on the lower-performance CXLMemUring hardware
accelerator, causing performance regressions relative to the
more selective CIRA few shot mode. This performance gap
demonstrates the importance of constructing hoists carefully.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Kexin Chu, Jianchang Su, Jesun Firoz, and Andi Quinn

CIRA few shot

CIRA w/o JIT

CIRA

179.9s

host

183.3s

Figure 5: End-to-end speedup of CXLMemUring across benchmarks. Speedup is computed as host execution time
divided by heterogeneous execution time with compiler-orchestrated overlap. The figure uses direct baseline
labels, a two-row layout, host runtime annotations, and a geometric-mean group on the right.

59.00s

amg

lulesh nekbone

0.5
0.0

bfs

bc

cc_sv

pr

cc

sssp pr_spmv

tc

1.00×
1.51×
1.43×
1.59×

845.0s

690.0s

735.0s

780.0s

455.0s

610.0s

520.0s

165.0s

1.0

210.0s

1.5

4333s

Normalized runtime
(host = 1.0)

2.0

0.5
0.0

pennant

is

ep

cg

mg

ft

Table 6: CXL vs. DRAM comparison for GAPBS. DRAM
binds data to local DDR memory; CXL binds the same
kernels to the CXL memory node while preserving
CPU placement. Slowdown is relative to the DRAM
run.

bt

sp

DRAM Stalls(Cyc)

CXL Stalls(Cyc)

CIRA Stalls(Cyc)

BFS
BC
PR
CC_SV
PR_SPMV

1.532B
1.214B
1.342B
1.692B
1.892B

5.341B
5.612B
7.341B
6.291B
7.401B

3.229B
2.341B
4.315B
4.313B
4.327B

In conclusion, we conclude that CXLMemUring’s performance comes in large part from the ability to offload complex
load operations (i.e., CIRA few shot), but that reaching the
highest benefit requires both creating and optimizing complex hoists.

Understanding CXLMemUring’s
Performance through Case Studies

We further elaborate on Q2 by analyzing CXLMemUring’s
performance on two candidate applications.
5.3.1 GAPBS. We use VTune to study the architectural effects of using CXLMemUring on a system with CXL memory.

lu

mcf

GeoMean

Table 7: MCF per-hoist profiling and optimization. Vortex prefetching reduces effective memory stall cycles
by hiding pointer-chasing latency (150 ns per chain
step).
Hotspot Functions

Kernel

5.3

138.0s

35.00s

908.8s

25.46s

104.6s

35.02s

1.0

273.1s

1.5

122.2s

Normalized runtime
(host = 1.0)

2.0

pricing_kernel
price_out_impl

CXL Stalls CIRA Stalls CXL Cache CIRA Cache
(cycles)
(cycles)
Hit %
Hit %
32034
3256

15332
5541

35290

20873

0.25
0.81

0.49
0.51

We profiled each GAPBS kernel three times: once with data
placed in local DRAM, once with data placed on CXL, and
once with data placed in CXL using CXLMemUring to accelerate accesses. We count the number of stalls that the
program incurs throughout its execution in each of the configurations.
Table 6 provides the results. We observe that using CXL
memory adds a considerable number of stalls to the DRAM
configuration—the average number of stalls grows from
1.53B to 6.40B cycles, or 4.17×. However, CXLMemUring
reduces many of the stalls from the base CXL approach: the
average number of stalls drops from 6.40B to 3.71B cycles, a
1.73× reduction compared to native CXL.

CXLMemUring : A Hardware Software Co-design Paradigm for Asynchronous and Flexible Parallel CXL Memory
Conference’17,
Pool Access
July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

5.3.2 MCF. Next, we analyze the performance of MCF on
CXLMemUring as well as when deployed natively on CXL.
We use vTune to measure the number of stalls that occur
in both configurations on MCF’s two hotspot functions (i.e.,
the functions that contribute most to CPU time). We also
calculate the cache hit % of the host CPU when deployed in
the CXL configuration (i.e., CXL Cache Hit %) and on the
CXLMemUring configuration (i.e., CXLMemUring Cache
Hit %). Table 7 provides the results.
We observe that CXLMemUring reduces the number of
stalls cumulatively across the hotspot functions by 1.69×. The
overall stall reduction is largely attributable to the dominant
hotspot, pricing_kernel: CIRA increases its cache hit
rate from 25% to 49%, cutting stall cycles by 52.1%. Although
price_out_impl sees higher stalls under CIRA, the reduction in pricing_kernel dominates, lowering total
stalls from 35,290 to 20,873 cycles. One interesting property
is that the stall reduction is non-uniform: CXLMemUring
actually incurs more stalls in price_out_impl compared
to CXL.

5.4

Overheads

Table 8: Runtime synchronization overhead breakdown (nanoseconds per operation). Measured on Intel
Agilex 7 FPGA at 200 MHz.
Operation

Latency (ns)

Host write to Vortex BRAM
Host read from Vortex BRAM
Host cira_doorbell_wait poll latency
Vortex cira_doorbell_ring latency
Cold Vortex hoist load
Average Vortex hoist load
Average cira_hoist_exec latency

1148
1052
510
480
512
45
1050

Table 9: gem5 comparison against AMU and Vanilla
CXL. Results are normalized to Vanilla CXL. AMU
improves host-side memory-level parallelism,
while CXLMemUring additionally moves addressgeneration and cache-state orchestration to the
CXL-attached device.
Benchmark
BFS
BC
PR
CC_SV
Geomean

CXL Latency(ms) AMU CIRA CIRA / AMU
220 0.82× 2.86×
3.49×
293 0.81× 3.72×
4.58×
118 0.67× 1.50×
2.25×
199 0.77× 2.55×
3.38×
197 0.76× 2.52×
3.30×

This subsection answers Q3 by measuring the fixed costs
that CXLMemUring must amortize. We isolate two sources
of overhead: (1) communication and memory-management
overhead from writing descriptors, polling completion state,
and installing cache lines; and (2) device compute overhead
from loading and dispatching Vortex-side functions. The
device, AMU adds asynchronous memory-access support
microbenchmark runs the same shared-buffer protocol used
inside the out-of-order CPU core. Its AMI instructions sepaby the runtime on the Agilex 7 platform and reports perrate request issue from response consumption, and the AMU
operation latency in Table 8.
tracks many outstanding requests using scratchpad and metaThe results suggest that the core primitives that CXLMemUrdata storage carved from the L2 cache. This design increases
ing uses to communicate across host and device fall into two
memory-level parallelism within the host core, but it does
general sets. First, some operations require roundtrip communot provide near-memory execution, device-side traversal.
nication from the host or device to the Device Coherence EnMoreover, AMU requires changes to the host CPU to add
gine, such as cira_doorbell_wait poll, cira_doorbell_ring,
the AMU logic. I.e., AMU does not provide CXLMemUring’s
and a cold Vortex hoist load (i.e., a hoist load that the Vortex
commodity support.
core has not previously completed). These operations take
Since AMU requires host CPU changes, we evaluate it usaround .5µs. Second, some operations require roundtrip coming a cycle accurate simulator, Gem5 [7, 43], and also create a
munication from the host or device to the Device Coherence
CXLMemUring port to Gem5. We run four benchmarks from
Engine and also that the other endpoint also have round-trip
GAPBS and measure the latency for both configurations as
communication with the Device Coherence Engine. Such
well as when using a CXL configuration of gem5. We model
operations, including Host to Vortex BRAM reads and writes
three configurations. Vanilla CXL uses the same host core but
as well as invocations of cira_hoist_exec, take around
places benchmark data in the modeled CXL memory node.
1µs.
AMU extends the host core with asynchronous memory requests and response polling, following the AMU execution
5.5 Comparison To Prior State-of-the-Art
model, but leaves all address generation and dependence
We compare CXLMemUring to an alternative approach for
traversal on the host. CIRA models the same CXL latency
hiding CXL memory latency, AMU[41]. AMU represents a
as Vanilla CXL, but offloads the selected memory-side slice
different point in the CXL latency-mitigation design space.
to a near-memory execution engine and applies the same
Rather than moving address-generation logic to a near-memory
hoist-formation and CXL.cache policy-selection rules used

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Kexin Chu, Jianchang Su, Jesun Firoz, and Andi Quinn

in the hardware evaluation. All results are normalized to
Vanilla CXL, so values greater than 1.0× indicate improvement over an unmodified CXL-attached-memory execution.
Table 9 presents the results.
We observe that AMU causes a slowdown when compared
to vanilla CXL. The key issue is that AMU’s scratchpad and
L2 cache compete for capacity, so the system observes a
larger number of cache misses compared to vanilla CXL. It
is likely that AMU would perform well given the perfect
configuration of L2 cache size and scratchpad size. CIRA
outperforms AMU. CIRA’s approach enables near-memory
cores to run ahead of the host and prepare future cache lines
before the host reaches the corresponding instruction. In
this way, CIRA exploits more asynchronous operations than
AMU.

6

Related Work

Far Memory and Disaggregated Memory Systems. A large
body of systems established two central lessons. First, transparent page-based mechanisms are often too coarse for irregular or pointer-heavy codes, where the dominant cost comes
from repeated dependent misses rather than from poor bulk
page placement [29, 34, 38]. Second, software-aware mechanisms become more effective as they move closer to the
program’s dependence structure, data layout, and access semantics [12, 34, 38, 40]. Our work inherits this insight but targets a different hardware setting. Prior far-memory systems
were primarily designed around RDMA-style remote memory, where data movement occurs through object- or pagegranularity software paths and remote memory is outside
the processor’s coherent cache hierarchy [29, 34]. In contrast,
CXL introduces a cache-coherent memory interface with substantially tighter integration between host processors and
attached memory or accelerator devices [8, 32]. That shift
changes the optimization target: instead of focusing only
on paging, prefetching, or placement, a compiler can reason about overlap between host execution and memory-side
orchestration in a shared-coherence setting. In this sense,
CXLMemUring is closer in spirit to compiler-guided farmemory systems such as TrackFM than to purely OS-level
tiering, but extends the idea to heterogeneous host–device
execution over CXL-attached memory [8, 38].
CXL Memory Expansion, Tiering, and Pooling. Recent CXL
work has largely focused on memory expansion, tiering,
topology effects, and pooling. The CXL standard itself defines coherent protocols for memory expansion and sharing, including the mechanisms that make device-attached
memory visible as part of a coherent system memory hierarchy [8]. Several recent studies have characterized the latency
and bandwidth behavior of real CXL memory devices and

topologies, showing that CXL memory is usable but substantially slower than local DRAM, with performance depending
strongly on placement, topology, and access pattern [36, 44].
Other work has explored how operating systems and virtualized environments should manage CXL-attached memory
through tiering and migration, for example via transparent
page placement or transactional migration across memory
tiers [30, 45, 47]. There is also active debate about the systemlevel value of CXL memory pooling, with some studies arguing that pooling may be less beneficial in practice than often
assumed once cost, complexity, and workload structure are
accounted for [23].
Processing-in-Memory and Near-Data Execution. Processingin-memory (PIM) and near-data processing (NDP) have long
pursued the goal of reducing data movement by executing
logic close to memory. Recent surveys show that this space
spans analog in-memory compute, logic-layer NDP in 3Dstacked memory, and programmable near-memory cores,
each with different tradeoffs in programmability, generality, and deployment complexity [1]. Real hardware results
from UPMEM have been particularly important in grounding the discussion: Nider et al. evaluated a commercial PIM
system in an off-the-shelf server and showed that while nearmemory execution can accelerate memory-bound kernels,
performance depends heavily on workload structure, available parallelism, and the partitioning of work between host
and memory-side processors [33]. Gomez-Luna et al. likewise analyzed real PIM hardware across a broad benchmark
suite and emphasized that memory-boundness alone is not
sufficient; performance also depends on irregularity, synchronization cost, data distribution, and the overheads of
coordinating host and PIM execution [11].
Fixed-Function and Programmable Data-Access Accelerators. A more targeted line of work accelerates memory access
itself rather than general computation. The closest recent
example is DX100, a programmable data-access accelerator for indirect memory accesses. DX100 offloads address
calculation and bulk data-access orchestration to a shared accelerator and provides a compact ISA plus compiler support
for transforming legacy code to use the device [19]. This is
an important step toward treating indirection as a first-class
acceleration target. However, DX100 is designed around a
dedicated access accelerator integrated into the system’s
memory path, with an instruction set specialized for indirect
access patterns and a hardware design aimed at improving
DRAM-level bandwidth utilization through reordering and
coalescing [19]. By contrast, CXLMemUring does not assume a fixed-function access engine or a predefined access
ISA. Instead, it generates device-side code from the program
itself and executes that code on near-memory programmable
cores attached through CXL. This makes CXLMemUring

CXLMemUring : A Hardware Software Co-design Paradigm for Asynchronous and Flexible Parallel CXL Memory
Conference’17,
Pool Access
July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

less specialized than DX100 but also more flexible: the outlined device region can incorporate workload-specific dependence traversal, prefetch triggering, and cache-management
behavior that need not fit a small fixed instruction vocabulary. More broadly, CXLMemUring differs from both classic
prefetchers and access accelerators in that its main abstraction is heterogeneous overlap between host computation
and memory-side orchestration, not just earlier issuance of
memory requests.

7

Conclusion

The CXL era necessitates a rethinking of the hardware-software
contract. The assumption that memory is a passive, uniform
resource is no longer tenable in a world of high-latency, disaggregated media with embedded compute capabilities and
programmable coherence-state behavior. Our VTune-driven
workload characterization demonstrates that memory bottlenecks are both pervasive and structurally diverse—with
hotspots that shift by query type, access pattern, and cache hierarchy level—ruling out fixed-ISA solutions and motivating
compiler-driven approaches. CXLMemUring demonstrates
that by exposing the heterogeneity of modern CXL memory
expanders to the compiler, generating flexible, asynchronous
offload strategies with true computation–communication
overlap, we can fundamentally alter the performance characteristics of the system. Through the CXLMemUring intermediate representation and the coordinated execution of x86
and Vortex cores, CXLMemUring effectively hides the “CXL
Tax,” turning the latency liability into a throughput asset.
As datacenters continue to disaggregate, compiler-driven
techniques like CXLMemUring will be essential to bridging
the gap between capacity and performance.

References
[1] Kazi Asifuzzaman and Mohammad Abdullah Al Faruque. 2023. A Survey on Processing-in-Memory Techniques: Advances and Challenges.
SmartMat 4, 1 (2023), e111. doi:10.1002/smm2.111
[2] Cagri Balkesen, Jens Teubner, Gustavo Alonso, and M Tamer Özsu.
2013. Main-memory hash joins on multi-core CPUs: Tuning to the
underlying hardware. In 2013 IEEE 29th International Conference on
Data Engineering (ICDE). IEEE, 362–373.
[3] Luiz André Barroso, Mike Marty, David A. Patterson, and
Parthasarathy Ranganathan. 2017. Attack of the Killer Microseconds.
Commun. ACM 60, 4 (April 2017), 48–54. doi:10.1145/3015146
[4] Scott Beamer, Krste Asanović, and David Patterson. 2015. The GAP
benchmark suite. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.03619 (2015).
[5] Scott Beamer, Krste Asanović, and David Patterson. 2015. The GAP
benchmark suite. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.03619 (2015).
[6] André Berthold, Constantin Fürst, Antonia Obersteiner, Lennart
Schmidt, Dirk Habich, Wolfgang Lehner, and Horst Schirmeier. 2024.
Demystifying intel data streaming accelerator for in-memory data
processing. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Disruptive Memory
Systems. 9–16.
[7] Nathan Binkert, Bradford Beckmann, Gabriel Black, Steven K Reinhardt, Ali Saidi, Arkaprava Basu, Joel Hestness, Derek R Hower, Tushar

Krishna, Somayeh Sardashti, et al. 2011. The gem5 simulator. ACM
SIGARCH computer architecture news 39, 2 (2011), 1–7.
[8] Compute Express Link Consortium. 2022.
Compute Express
Link Specification Revision 3.0. Compute Express Link Consortium. https://computeexpresslink.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/
CXL-3.0-Specification.pdf Accessed: 2026-04-14.
[9] Compute Express Link Consortium. 2023. Compute Express Link (CXL)
Specification, Revision 3.1. https://computeexpresslink.org/. Accessed
2025-12-01.
[10] Ahmed El-Sabbagh et al. 2019. Vortex: An Open RISC-V GPGPU for
Education and Research. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computer
Architecture Research with RISC-V (CARRV).
[11] Juan Gómez-Luna, José María Gómez-Luna, et al. 2021. Analysis of
Real Processing-in-Memory Hardware. IEEE Access 9 (2021), 160209–
160222. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3132385
[12] Zhiyuan Guo, Yiying Zhang, and Zijian He. 2023. MIRA: Towards
a Transparent and Efficient Far Memory System. Ph. D. Dissertation.
University of California, San Diego.
[13] Paul Henning. 2023. Ume: Unstructured Mesh Explorations. Technical
Report. Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), Los Alamos, NM
(United States).
[14] Stratos Idreos, Fabian Groffen, Niels Nes, Stefan Manegold, K Sjoerd
Mullender, Martin L Kersten, et al. 2012. MonetDB: Two decades of
research in column-oriented database architectures. IEEE Data Eng.
Bull. 35, 1 (2012), 40–45.
[15] Saba Jamilan, Tanvir Ahmed Khan, Grant Ayers, Baris Kasikci, and
Heiner Litz. 2022. Apt-get: Profile-guided timely software prefetching.
In Proceedings of the Seventeenth European Conference on Computer
Systems. 747–764.
[16] Saba Jamilan, Tanvir Ahmed Khan, Grant Ayers, Baris Kasikci, and
Heiner Litz. 2022. APT-GET: Profile-Guided Timely Software Prefetching. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth European Conference on Computer
Systems. 747–764.
[17] Houxiang Ji, Srikar Vanavasam, Yang Zhou, Qirong Xia, Jinghan
Huang, Yifan Yuan, Ren Wang, Pekon Gupta, Bhushan Chitlur, Ipoom
Jeong, et al. 2024. Demystifying a cxl type-2 device: A heterogeneous
cooperative computing perspective. In 2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE, 1504–1517.
[18] Alireza Khadem, Kamalavasan Kamalakkannan, Zhenyan Zhu, Akash
Poptani, Yufeng Gu, Jered Benjamin Dominguez-Trujillo, Nishil Talati,
Daichi Fujiki, Scott Mahlke, Galen Shipman, et al. 2025. DX100: Programmable Data Access Accelerator for Indirection. In Proceedings of
the 52nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture.
1641–1658.
[19] Alireza Khadem, Kamalavasan Kamalakkannan, Zhenyan Zhu, Akash
Poptani, Yufeng Gu, Jered Benjamin Dominguez-Trujillo, Nishil Talati,
Daichi Fujiki, Scott Mahlke, Galen Shipman, and Reetuparna Das. 2025.
DX100: A Programmable Data Access Accelerator for Indirection. In
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture (ISCA 2025). Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.
1145/3695053.3731015
[20] Michael Kunze et al. 2021. The Tensor Operator Set Architecture
(TOSA). arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.08218 (2021).
[21] Reese Kuper, Ipoom Jeong, Yifan Yuan, Ren Wang, Narayan Ranganathan, Nikhil Rao, Jiayu Hu, Sanjay Kumar, Philip Lantz, and
Nam Sung Kim. 2024. A quantitative analysis and guidelines of data
streaming accelerator in modern intel xeon scalable processors. In
Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2.
37–54.
[22] Patrick Lavin, Jeffrey Young, Richard Vuduc, Jason Riedy, Aaron Vose,
and Daniel Ernst. 2021. Evaluating Gather and Scatter Performance

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Yiwei Yang, Yusheng Zheng, Kexin Chu, Jianchang Su, Jesun Firoz, and Andi Quinn

on CPUs and GPUs. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Memory Systems (Washington, DC, USA) (MEMSYS ’20). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 209–222. doi:10.1145/
3422575.3422794
[23] Philip Levis, Kun Lin, and Amy Tai. 2023. A Case Against CXL Memory
Pooling. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in
Networks. Association for Computing Machinery, 18–24. doi:10.1145/
3626111.3628195
[24] Zhuohan Li, Lianmin Zheng, Yinmin Zhong, Vincent Liu, Ying Sheng,
Xin Jin, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Hao Zhang, Joseph E Gonzalez,
et al. 2023. AlpaServe: Statistical Multiplexing with Model Parallelism
for Deep Learning Serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11665 (2023).
[25] LLVM Project. 2023. ClangIR: A High-Level IR for C/C++. https:
//clangir.llvm.org/. Accessed 2025-12-01.
[26] LLVM Project. 2023. MLIR: Multi-Level Intermediate Representation.
https://mlir.llvm.org/. Accessed 2025-12-01.
[27] LLVM Project. 2023. MLIR Structured Control Flow (SCF) Dialect.
https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/SCF/. Accessed 2025-12-01.
[28] LLVM Project. 2023. MLIR TOSA Dialect Documentation. https:
//mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/TOSA/. Accessed 2025-12-01.
[29] Hasan Al Maruf and Mosharaf Chowdhury. 2020. Effectively Prefetching Remote Memory with Leap. In 2020 USENIX Annual Technical
Conference (USENIX ATC ’20). 843–857.
[30] Hasan Al Maruf, Hao Wang, Abhishek Dhanotia, Johannes Weiner,
Niket Agarwal, Pallab Bhattacharya, Chris Petersen, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Shobhit Kanaujia, and Prakash Chauhan. 2023. TPP: Transparent
Page Placement for CXL-Enabled Tiered-Memory. In Proceedings of
the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3. Association
for Computing Machinery, 742–755. doi:10.1145/3582016.3582063
[31] Michelle Moyer. 2026. NAS Parallel Benchmarks. https://www.nas.
nasa.gov/software/npb.html. Accessed 2026-04-15.
[32] Alyssa Milburn, Rakesh Kumar, et al. 2024. An Introduction to the
Compute Express Link (CXL) Interconnect. Queue (2024). doi:10.1145/
3669900 Referenced via ACM Digital Library.
[33] Joel Nider, Lavanya Subramanian, Juan Gómez-Luna, Raghavendra
Singh, Onur Mutlu, et al. 2021. A Case Study of Processing-in-Memory
in Off-the-Shelf Systems. In 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 21). USENIX Association, 177–192. https://www.usenix.
org/conference/atc21/presentation/nider
[34] Zhenyuan Ruan, Malte Schwarzkopf, Marcos K Aguilera, and Adam
Belay. 2020. {AIFM}:{High-Performance},{Application-Integrated}
far memory. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 20). 315–332.
[35] Debendra Das Sharma, Mahesh Wagh, et al. 2024. An Introduction to
the Compute Express Link (CXL) Interconnect. Commun. ACM (2024).
Also appears in ACM Queue.
[36] Yuhao Sun et al. 2024. A Characteristic Study of Memory over the
Compute Express Link. University of Illinois technical report / thesis
repository (2024). https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/items/131594
[37] Nishil Talati, Kyle May, Armand Behroozi, Yichen Yang, Kuba Kaszyk,
Christos Vasiladiotis, Tarunesh Verma, Lu Li, Brandon Nguyen, Jiawen
Sun, et al. 2021. Prodigy: Improving the memory latency of dataindirect irregular workloads using hardware-software co-design. In
2021 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA). IEEE, 654–667.
[38] Brian R. Tauro, Brian Suchy, Simone Campanoni, Peter Dinda, and
Kyle C. Hale. 2024. TrackFM: Far-out Compiler Support for a Far
Memory World. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 1. Association for Computing Machinery, 401–419.
doi:10.1145/3617232.3624856

[39] Themis Valtinos. 2024. Partitioned Hash Join. https://github.com/
themisvaltinos/Partitioned-Hash-Join. GitHub repository. Accessed:
2026-05-15.
[40] Chenggang Wang, Yiying Zhang, and Harry Xu. 2022. MemLiner:
Lining up Tracing and Application for a Far-Memory-Friendly Runtime. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 22). USENIX Association, 447–463. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/osdi22/presentation/wang
[41] Luming Wang, Xu Zhang, Tianyue Lu, and Mingyu Chen. 2022. Asynchronous Memory Access Unit for General Purpose Processors. BenchCouncil Transactions on Benchmarks, Standards and Evaluations 2, 2
(2022), 100061.
[42] Luming Wang, Xu Zhang, Songyue Wang, Zhuolun Jiang, Tianyue
Lu, Mingyu Chen, Siwei Luo, and Keji Huang. 2024. Asynchronous
memory access unit: Exploiting massive parallelism for far memory
access. ACM Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization 21, 3
(2024), 1–28.
[43] Yanjing Wang, Lizhou Wu, Sunfeng Gao, Yibo Tang, Junhui Luo, Zicong Wang, Yang Ou, Dezun Dong, Nong Xiao, and Mingche Lai. 2026.
Cohet: A CXL-Driven Coherent Heterogeneous Computing Framework with Hardware-Calibrated Full-System Simulation. In 2026 IEEE
International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA). IEEE, 1–16.
[44] Jie Wu et al. 2024. Performance Study of CXL Memory Topology. In
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Memory Systems (MEMSYS). https://pasalabs.org/papers/2024/MemSys_24_CXL_Memory_
Topology.pdf
[45] Lingfeng Xiang, Zhen Lin, Weishu Deng, Hui Lu, Jia Rao, Yifan Yuan,
and Ren Wang. 2024. Nomad: Non-Exclusive Memory Tiering via
Transactional Page Migration. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24). USENIX Association,
19–35. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi24/presentation/xiang
[46] Yuhong Zhong, Daniel S. Berger, Carl A. Waldspurger, Ryan Wee, Ishwar Agarwal, Rajat Agarwal, Frank Hady, Karthik Kumar, Mark D.
Hill, Mosharaf Chowdhury, and Asaf Cidon. 2024. Managing Memory
Tiers with CXL in Virtualized Environments. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24).
USENIX Association, 37–56. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
osdi24/presentation/zhong-yuhong
[47] Yuhong Zhong, Daniel S. Berger, Carl A. Waldspurger, Ryan Wee, Ishwar Agarwal, Rajat Agarwal, Frank Hady, Karthik Kumar, Mark D.
Hill, Mosharaf Chowdhury, and Asaf Cidon. 2024. Managing Memory
Tiers with CXL in Virtualized Environments. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24).
USENIX Association, 37–56. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
osdi24/presentation/zhong-yuhong

