DAXFS: A Lock-Free Shared Filesystem
for CXL Disaggregated Memory

arXiv:2604.01620v1 [cs.OS] 2 Apr 2026

Cong Wang
Multikernel Technologies, Inc.
cwang@multikernel.io

Yiwei Yang
UC Santa Cruz
yyang363@ucsc.edu

weights without per-host duplication), container rootfs
sharing (N containers backed by a single copy), and
CXL memory pooling across hosts.
No existing filesystem fills this role (Table 1). Per-host
DAX filesystems [8, 25] maintain redundant metadata
and page caches on each host, negating CXL’s sharing
benefit. Distributed filesystems (NFS, CephFS, Lustre) interpose network protocols that add µs-scale latency to what should be ns-scale load/store operations.
FamFS [12] targets CXL shared memory but enforces a
single-master model where clients cannot create, write,
or delete files (§2). There is no lock-free, multi-host
shared filesystem that exploits CXL hardware atomics.
To bridge this gap, we introduce DaxFS, a lock-free
Linux filesystem designed for multi-host concurrent access to CXL shared memory. DaxFS uses hardwaresupported cmpxchg for multi-host coordination, keeping
the CPU data path lock-free without journaling or central coordinators. A CAS-based hash overlay enables
concurrent file writes from independent hosts, and a
Multi-Host CLOCK (MH-clock) algorithm decentralizes shared page cache eviction, both operating through
cmpxchg on DAX memory (§3–§4). Because the core
coordination path is built on cmpxchg, the design also
admits a preliminary GPU path for accelerators that
issue PCIe AtomicOps over the same fabric (§4.4).
To summarize, this paper makes three contributions:

Abstract
CXL (Compute Express Link) enables multiple hosts
to share byte-addressable memory with hardware cache
coherence, but no existing filesystem exploits this for
lock-free multi-host coordination. We present DaxFS,
a Linux filesystem for CXL shared memory that uses
cmpxchg atomic operations, which CXL makes coherent
across host boundaries, as its sole coordination primitive.
A CAS-based hash overlay enables lock-free concurrent
writes from multiple hosts without any centralized coordinator. A cooperative shared page cache with a novel
multi-host clock eviction algorithm (MH-clock) provides
demand-paged caching in shared DAX memory, with
fully decentralized victim selection via cmpxchg. We
validate multi-host correctness using QEMU-emulated
CXL 3.0, where two virtual hosts share a memory region with TCP-forwarded atomics. Under cross-host
contention, DaxFS maintains >99% CAS accuracy
with no lost updates. On single-host DRAM-backed
DAX, DaxFS exceeds tmpfs throughput across all write
workloads, achieving up to 2.68× higher random write
throughput with 4 threads and 1.18× higher random
read throughput at 64 KB. Preliminary GPU microbenchmarks show that the cmpxchg-based design extends
to GPU threads performing page cache operations at
PCIe 5.0 bandwidth limits.

1

Yusheng Zheng
UC Santa Cruz
yzhen165@ucsc.edu

Introduction

1. The design and implementation of DaxFS,
the first filesystem that enables lock-free multi-host
writes on CXL shared memory without a centralized
coordinator.

CXL 3.0 [6] enables multiple independent servers to
share byte-addressable memory with hardware-coherent
atomic operations, creating a new opportunity for building shared-memory system abstractions at near-local
DRAM latency. The Linux DAX (Direct Access) subsystem [20] can map such memory into user address spaces
without page-cache copies, but practical workloads require filesystem semantics: hierarchical naming, POSIX
permissions, and kernel-managed lifecycle. Target scenarios include multi-host LLM inference (sharing model

2. MH-clock, a decentralized cache eviction algorithm
that adapts CLOCK for lock-free operation across
CXL-connected hosts, with no centralized eviction
daemon (§3.5).
3. An evaluation showing that DaxFS exceeds tmpfs
on most single-host workloads (up to 2.68× at
1

4 threads) and maintains >99% CAS accuracy under
QEMU-emulated cross-host contention (§5).

2

model where one designated host pre-allocates files and
clients replay its metadata log. Clients cannot create,
append, truncate, or delete files, and there is no shared
cache or CXL-atomic coordination. We provide a detailed architectural comparison in §6.

Motivation

CXL 3.0 shared memory model. CXL 3.0 [6] introduces Global Fabric Attached Memory (GFAM): a
memory device attached to a CXL switch fabric that is
directly accessible by multiple hosts via load/store operations. The device coherency engine (DCOH) maintains
a snoop filter that provides hardware cache coherence
(HDM-DB back-invalidation) for selected memory regions; DaxFS targets this hardware-coherent region for
its metadata and coordination structures. For the first
time over a commodity interconnect, independent servers
can perform atomic read-modify-write operations on the
same physical memory with cache-line granularity, with
minimal software coherence overhead. A 64-bit cmpxchg
issued by Host A on a CXL memory address is atomic
with respect to a concurrent cmpxchg by Host B on
the same address. This primitive is the foundation of
DaxFS’s coordination model.
This hardware capability creates a new design point
for shared data access, analogous to the multikernel
problem [3] where independent OS instances coordinate
through shared memory rather than message passing.
However, existing system software is not prepared for this
model. We identify the following fundamental problems
that collectively require a new filesystem design.

Network Protocol Overhead. Distributed filesystems (NFS, CephFS, Lustre) could serve multi-host access, but they interpose a network protocol between
applications and byte-addressable memory, adding µsscale latency to what should be ns-scale load/store operations. When the memory is already directly accessible
via CXL, a network filesystem negates the entire benefit
of disaggregated memory.
GPU Data Path Overhead. GPU workloads are
the largest consumers of bulk filesystem data. Loading
a 70B-parameter LLM at FP16 requires reading 140 GB
from the filesystem into GPU memory. The conventional
path is: (1) read() copies file data from the kernel page
cache to a user-space buffer; (2) cudaMemcpy() copies
the buffer across PCIe to the GPU. Each gigabyte crosses
the CPU twice and the PCIe bus once. GPUDirect Storage [10] bypasses the CPU by DMA-ing from an NVMe
device directly to GPU memory, but it still requires a
block device, cannot participate in filesystem coordination, and does not support shared multi-host access.
CXL shared memory and GPUs already share the same
PCIe fabric. PCIe 3.0+ supports AtomicOp Transaction Layer Packets (TLPs), including compare-and-swap,
that are serialized at the memory controller alongside
CPU LOCK CMPXCHG instructions. A filesystem whose
coordination is built entirely on cmpxchg can therefore
extend to GPU threads that issue atomicCAS over the
same PCIe fabric, potentially enabling GPU-side filesystem coordination with reduced CPU involvement. We
validate the feasibility of this path with microbenchmarks in §5.5; end-to-end integration remains future
work.
These observations lead to three design requirements:

Per-Host Duplication. tmpfs, ext4-dax, and NOVA
each maintain per-host metadata (superblock, inode
cache, dentry cache) and per-host page caches. Even if
two hosts map the same physical memory, each host instantiates independent VFS state. CXL shared memory
makes the data directly accessible to all hosts, yet existing filesystems still create per-host page cache copies of
that data, wasting the very memory capacity that disaggregation is meant to pool. For workloads sharing large
read-only datasets (e.g. container base images, shared
model weights, reference databases), N hosts produce N
redundant copies of data that already resides in shared
memory.

1. Lock-free multi-host writes. Multiple hosts
must create files, write data, and modify metadata
concurrently without a central coordinator or distributed lock manager.

No Multi-Host Coordination. Existing DAX filesystems assume a single-host, single-writer model. ext4-dax
uses journaling with per-host transaction IDs; NOVA
uses per-CPU log structures. Neither can handle concurrent writers on different hosts accessing the same
metadata through shared memory. FamFS [12] is the
closest existing system: it targets CXL shared memory
and supports multiple hosts mounting the same DAX
region. However, FamFS uses a single-master log-replay

2. Shared caching. A single cache instance in shared
memory must serve all hosts, with coherent state
transitions that prevent duplicate fills.
3. Zero-copy access. Applications should mmap file
data directly from CXL memory without copying
through a per-host page cache.
2

Table 1: Feature comparison of DaxFS with existing filesystems. “Partial” indicates DAX support exists but the
filesystem still maintains significant metadata structures (NOVA, PMFS) or is read-only (EROFS).
Property

DaxFS NOVA PMFS FamFS ext4-dax EROFS OverlayFS

Zero-copy DAX reads
Multi-host concurrent writes
Lock-free data path
Shared cache across hosts
CXL atomics for coordination
GPU zero-copy data access
GPU-side cache coordination
Layered storage (base+overlay)
Self-contained image
Flat validatable format

Superblock (4KB)

Host A

read
cmp
xch
k g
ac
ll b
a
f
cmpxchg

Host B

Partial

Partial

N/A

3.2

magic, version, offsets

Base Image (opt.)
Inode Table (64B × N)

Hash Overlay (opt.)

Bucket Array (16B × M)

Page Cache (opt.)

dma-buf
atomicCAS
4KB slots + metadata
GPU

3.2.1
Figure 1: DaxFS memory layout on a CXL shared
memory region. Multiple hosts and GPU accelerators
access the same DAX-mapped region concurrently: reads
resolve from the overlay down to the base image; writes
insert via cmpxchg; the shared page cache serves all
hosts and GPUs. GPUs map the region via dma-buf
and coordinate using PCIe AtomicOp TLPs.

3

On-Disk Format

Flat Directory Format

Directories store fixed-size entries of 271 bytes each (the
daxfs dirent structure), containing a name length, an
inode number, a parent inode number, and a 254-byte
inline name. Unlike pointer-based directory formats
(htree in ext4, B-tree in Btrfs), flat arrays have no cycles
or dangling pointers, support bounded iteration with
a known upper bound, and can be fully validated in a
single sequential pass at mount time.

Design
3.2.2

DaxFS is designed around three principles: (1) memory
is the storage, not a cache for a block device; (2) reads
should be free, resolving to direct pointer dereferences;
and (3) coordination uses only hardware atomics, with
no locks on the data path.

3.1

N/A
N/A

DaxFS uses a deliberately simple flat format designed
for safe handling of untrusted images and efficient direct
access. The four regions (superblock, base image, hash
overlay, page cache) are laid out sequentially; each region
uses a 4 KB header with magic numbers and size fields
for independent validation.

Data Area (files + dirents)

Pool (inodes, pages, dirents)

shar
ed

Partial
N/A
N/A

Overlay Pool Entries

Pool entries are variable-size. Inode entries (32 B) store
mode, uid, gid, size, and timestamps, identified by a
type header at offset 0. Data pages (4 KB) are raw file
data with no header; the entry type is inferred from
the hash key encoding (§3.4). Removing the header
makes consecutively allocated data pages contiguous in
memory, enabling the read path to coalesce sequential
pages into a single large copy (§3.3). Dirent entries
(∼280 B) record the parent inode, name, target inode,
mode, and a tombstone flag for deletions. Dirlist entries
(16 B) serve as per-directory list heads linking overlay
dirents.
Each entry type has a per-type free list for recycling.
The free list head is stored in the overlay header and
updated via cmpxchg, making recycling lock-free across
hosts. Free-list recycling reuses the first 8 bytes of the
freed entry as the next-free pointer; for data pages, these
bytes are simply overwritten with user data on reallocation.

Architecture Overview

DaxFS operates on a contiguous DAX-mapped memory
region containing up to four areas laid out sequentially:
Figure 1 illustrates the layout. The filesystem supports
three operating modes depending on which regions are
present. In static mode ([Super][Base Image]), the
base image is self-contained and read-only. Split mode
([Super][Base Image][Overlay][PCache]) adds a
writable overlay and shared page cache, with bulk
file data in a separate backing file. Empty mode
([Super][Overlay][PCache]) has no base image; all
content is written through the overlay.
3

3.3

Zero-Copy Read Path

3.4.3

In DaxFS, file reads resolve to direct pointers into DAX
memory without any intermediate copying. The read
path first looks up the data page in the hash overlay for
key (ino ≪ 20) | pgoff; if found, it returns a pointer
directly into the pool. If absent, the path falls back to
the base image’s data area using the inode’s stored data
offset. For split mode with a backing file, the path
consults the shared page cache as a final fallback. At no
point is data copied. For mmap, the filesystem installs
PFN (page frame number) mappings directly to the
DAX memory, so user-space loads resolve to the physical
memory in a single page table walk. Data pages are
page-aligned in the pool, ensuring that PFN mappings
are always valid.

3.4

To insert a new entry, a host:
1. Computes hash = key % bucket count.
2. Reads bucket[hash].state key.
3. If
FREE:
attempts
cmpxchg(&bucket[hash].state key, 0, key
≪ 1 | 1). On success, allocates a pool entry and
writes pool off with smp wmb ordering. On failure
(another host won the race), retries from step 2.
4. If USED with matching key: the entry already exists
(update or conflict).
5. If USED with different key: linear probe to hash+1
and repeat.

Hash Overlay: Lock-Free Writes via
CAS

This protocol is lock-free: no host can block another.
Hash collisions are resolved by linear probing within the
table.

The hash overlay is the core mechanism that enables
concurrent multi-host writes. It is an open-addressing
hash table with linear probing, stored entirely in DAX
memory, where all mutations use a single 64-bit cmpxchg.

3.4.4
3.4.1

Bucket Structure

Pool Allocator

Pool entries are variable-size: inodes (32 B), data pages
(4 KB), and dirents (∼280 B). Allocation uses an atomic
bump pointer with type-dependent alignment:

Each bucket is 16 bytes:
struct daxfs_ovl_bucket {
uint64_t state_key; /* bit 0: USED/FREE
bits 63:1: key */
uint64_t pool_off; /* offset into pool */
};

aligned = ALIGN(pool_alloc, align);
off = atomic_cmpxchg(&hdr->pool_alloc,
pool_alloc,
aligned + size);

Bit 0 of state key distinguishes FREE (0) from
USED (1). The remaining 63 bits encode the lookup
key.
3.4.2

Insert Protocol

Metadata entries use 8-byte alignment; data pages use
PAGE SIZE alignment. Page-aligning data allocations
serves two purposes: (1) it enables DAX mmap to install
PFN mappings directly to overlay pages, and (2) it
ensures that consecutive data page allocations produce
contiguous memory, enabling read-path coalescing (§3.3).
The alignment gap between a metadata entry and the
next data page is at most 4 KB of wasted pool space, a
negligible fraction of typical pool sizes (64 MB+).
Freed entries are recycled through per-type lock-free
free lists (CAS on list head), avoiding pool exhaustion
for long-running workloads.

Key Encoding

DaxFS encodes four entry types into the 63-bit key
space:
• Data page: (ino ≪ 20) | pgoff. Supports up
to 220 pages (4 GB) per file.
• Inode metadata: (ino ≪ 20) | 0xFFFFF. The
sentinel page offset distinguishes inode entries from
data.

3.4.5

• Directory list head: (ino ≪ 20) | 0xFFFFE.
Points to the first overlay dirent for a directory.

Directory Operations

Each directory maintains a per-directory linked list of
overlay dirents. The list head is stored at key (dir ino
≪ 20) | 0xFFFFE. readdir iterates both the base image dirent array and the overlay list, with overlay entries
taking precedence. Deletion uses tombstone entries.

• Directory entry: FNV-1a(parent ino, name). A
63-bit hash of the parent inode number and entry
name.
4

3.5

1. Cold victim. Scan the 8-slot probe window for
a VALID slot with ref bit=0 and refcount=0. If
found, CAS it to FREE and restart the fill.

Shared Page Cache

The shared page cache (pcache) provides cooperative
demand-paged caching for backing store mode. It resides
in DAX memory and is therefore directly accessible by
all hosts sharing the CXL memory region.
3.5.1

2. Clear and yield. If all probed slots are hot
(ref bit=1), clear their ref bit fields and yield the
CPU briefly (cpu relax). This gives other hosts an
opportunity to re-touch genuinely hot entries before
the re-scan.

Slot State Machine

Each cache slot has a 16-byte metadata entry:

3. Re-scan. Scan again for a cold, unpinned victim.
If still none, force-evict the first VALID slot with
refcount=0, ignoring ref bit.

struct daxfs_pcache_slot {
__le64 state_tag; /* bits[1:0]=state,
bits[5:2]=refcount, bits[63:6]=tag */
__le32 ref_bit; /* clock: recently used */
__le32 reserved;
};

A separate background clock sweep periodically advances a shared atomic evict hand counter by 64 slots
using cmpxchg; the host that wins the CAS clears
ref bit on all VALID slots in that window. Hosts
that lose the race skip the sweep, ensuring that only one
host clears each window and ref bit values decay at a
controlled rate even under contention.
The refcount in state tag ensures that slots actively
being read by any host are never evicted. Readers CASincrement the refcount before accessing slot data and
CAS-decrement it afterward, providing safe pinning without locks.

The state machine uses three states encoded in the
low 2 bits:
cmpxchg

cmpxchg

FREE (0) −−−−→ PENDING (1) −−−−→ VALID (2)
Bits [5:2] hold a 4-bit refcount (0–15 concurrent readers), and the upper 58 bits encode the tag identifying
which file page this slot caches (§3.4). Packing state,
refcount, and tag into a single 64-bit word allows a single
cmpxchg to atomically update all three fields, which is
essential for lock-free multi-host coordination.
Fill protocol. When a host needs a page not in the
cache:

3.5.3

Multi-File Support

1. Probe up to 8 slots starting at the hash position.
If a matching VALID slot is found, pin it (CASincrement refcount) and return. If a FREE slot is
found, record it.

The tag encoding (ino ≪ 20) | pgoff supports up to
220 pages (4 GB) per file. Multiple backing files share the
same cache through a backing file array in the superblock,
with inode numbers namespaced per file.

2. cmpxchg the FREE slot from FREE to PENDING
with the desired tag. If another host wins, retry.

3.6

Cross-host coherency follows from CXL hardware coherence. Two specific mechanisms warrant discussion:

3. Read the backing file page into the slot’s data area
via kernel read.

i size coherency. When Host A appends data and
updates the file size in the overlay inode entry, Host B
must see the new size. DaxFS stores the authoritative
i size in the overlay inode entry (DAX memory). On
each read path entry, DaxFS performs a READ ONCE
on the overlay’s size field and updates the in-kernel
VFS inode, ensuring reads always see the latest file size
without explicit invalidation messages.

4. cmpxchg the slot from PENDING to VALID.
Other hosts that need the same page during step 3
see the PENDING state and busy-poll until VALID,
avoiding duplicate reads from the backing file.
3.5.2

Cross-Host Coherency

MH-Clock Eviction

When all probe slots are occupied, DaxFS uses a novel
multi-host clock (MH-clock) eviction algorithm, adapted
from the classic CLOCK algorithm [5] for lock-free operation across CXL-connected hosts. Unlike the standard
CLOCK algorithm, which assumes a single centralized
hand managed by one OS instance, MH-clock is fully
decentralized: each host independently selects victims
within its local probe window using three escalating
phases:

Memory ordering. Insert operations use smp wmb
between writing pool entry contents and writing the
bucket’s pool off field. Lookup operations use smp rmb
after reading pool off to ensure they see the complete
pool entry. On x86, these compile to compiler barriers
(x86 provides TSO ordering); on ARM64, they emit fence
instructions.
5

4

integrity, inode table bounds, directory entry references,
and region overlap. The absence of pointer-based structures eliminates cycle injection, dangling pointer exploitation, and unbounded traversal, which is important for
mounting untrusted images in container environments.

Implementation

DaxFS is implemented as a loadable Linux kernel module in approximately 2,500 lines of C. It registers a filesystem type (daxfs) and supports both the legacy mount(2)
interface and the modern fsopen/fsconfig/fsmount interface introduced in Linux 5.6.

4.1

4.4

Because DaxFS operates on DAX memory, it can export
the filesystem region to GPU accelerators on the same
PCIe fabric via dma-buf. The DAXFS IOC GET DMABUF
ioctl returns a dma-buf file descriptor for the mount’s
DAX region, which a GPU driver can then map for
peer-to-peer reads without CPU-mediated copies.
We prototype a P2PDMA integration using modified
NVIDIA open GPU kernel modules [4] that register the
dma-buf region as pinned GPU-accessible memory via
custom ioctls. GPU threads can then issue Copy Engine transfers directly between VRAM and the DAX
region. Because DaxFS’s coordination is built entirely
on cmpxchg, GPU threads can also participate in page
cache lookups by issuing PCIe AtomicOp TLPs, which
the memory controller serializes alongside CPU atomics.
We evaluate the feasibility of this path with microbenchmarks in §5.5.

Memory Mapping

DaxFS supports two memory backing modes. In the
physical address path, the phys= and size= mount options cause DaxFS to call memremap() on the specified physical range; this is the primary path for Optane PMem and CXL memory devices. Alternatively,
the DMA buffer path uses the fsopen API: a userspace process passes a dma-buf file descriptor via
FSCONFIG SET FD, and DaxFS calls dma buf vmap() to
obtain a kernel virtual mapping. Both modes bypass
the kernel’s dax device abstraction entirely, mapping
memory directly into the filesystem’s address space.

4.2

VFS Integration

DaxFS registers standard VFS operations. Inode operations (lookup, create, mkdir, symlink, rename, unlink,
setattr) all route writes through the hash overlay; the
base image is never modified.
The read iter file operation performs zero-copy reads
by returning pointers into DAX memory. For overlay
data, the read path detects physically contiguous pages
and coalesces them into a single copy to iter call: because data pages are raw 4 KB allocations with no header,
pages allocated by the same bump operation are adjacent in memory. After looking up the first page (via the
per-inode xarray cache), the read path checks whether
subsequent pages are physically adjacent and, if so, extends the copy region. For a 16 MB sequential read of
sequentially written data, this reduces the operation
from 4,096 individual copies to a single contiguous transfer. For pcache-backed data, the read path pins the
cache slot (incrementing refcount) before returning data,
preventing eviction during the read. Address space operations (readpage/readahead) provide integration with
the kernel page cache on non-DAX access paths.
Data resolution on every read path calls
daxfs refresh isize(), which performs a READ ONCE
on the overlay’s size field, ensuring cross-host coherency
of file sizes without explicit invalidation.

4.3

GPU P2PDMA Integration

5

Evaluation

We evaluate DaxFS’s filesystem throughput against
tmpfs on a single host (§5.2–§5.3) and characterize GPU
P2P access latency (§5.5). tmpfs represents the performance ceiling for in-memory filesystems: it runs entirely
in DRAM with no persistence, no DAX layer, and no
sharing overhead. Multi-host evaluation on CXL hardware is discussed in §5.7.

5.1

Experimental Setup

We use two hardware configurations:
Platform A (Table 2, GPU benchmarks). Dualsocket Intel Xeon (48 cores, 96 threads), 512 GB DDR5,
NVIDIA RTX 5090 (PCIe 5.0 x16). DaxFS is backed
by a 512 MB contiguous DRAM region allocated at
runtime via a CMA-based allocator and mapped with
memremap(MEMREMAP WB), exercising the same writeback-cached code path that CXL memory devices use.
For GPU benchmarks, the DAX region is additionally
exported to the GPU via dma-buf (§4.4).
Platform B (Figures 2–5). Intel Xeon Gold 5418Y,
DRAM-backed DAX. This platform compares DaxFS
against ext4-dax and tmpfs on sequential read throughput, latency, and metadata operations.
Software. Linux 7.0 on both platforms. Benchmarks
use fio 3.x with the synchronous I/O engine. Each test

Mount-Time Validation

The flat format (§3.2) enables complete image validation
in a single sequential scan at mount time. When the
validate option is specified, DaxFS checks superblock
6

writes a 64 MB file, then reads it back. The filesystem
is reformatted between write tests to ensure first-write
measurements reflect cold overlay state. The DaxFS
overlay is configured with a 400 MB pool and 65,536
hash buckets.
Baseline. tmpfs backed by system DRAM. Both
DaxFS and tmpfs operate entirely in DRAM, isolating
filesystem-layer overhead from media speed differences.

5.2

Table 2: fio throughput comparison: DaxFS vs. tmpfs
on DRAM. 64 MB files, synchronous I/O engine. Higher
is better for throughput; ratio > 1 means DaxFS wins.
Benchmark

Sequential Throughput

Table 2 presents the full results. We highlight the key
findings below.
Writes. First-write throughput ranges from 1.16–
1.27× tmpfs across block sizes. Batch pool allocation (a
single cmpxchg reserves N entries) and the contiguous
overlay layout amortise per-page allocation cost, allowing
DaxFS to beat tmpfs even on cold writes. On rewrites
(all pages cached in the per-inode xarray), DaxFS extends its lead: 1.18× at 4 KB and 1.09× at 1 MB. The
advantage comes from DaxFS’s lock-free overlay: writes
resolve to a direct DRAM pointer via xarray lookup with
no page-cache lock acquisition.
Reads. Sequential reads after a write hit the perinode xarray cache, which maps page offsets to overlay
DRAM pointers in O(1). DaxFS achieves 0.87–1.08×
tmpfs throughput. At 4 KB block size, DaxFS is 8%
faster than tmpfs because it avoids the VFS page cache
machinery: each read iter call resolves directly to a
copy to iter from a DRAM pointer, whereas tmpfs
traverses filemap read, filemap get pages, and folio
reference counting.

5.3

DaxFS

tmpfs

Ratio

Sequential Write (MiB/s)
4K first
1,730
4K rewrite
1,939
64K first
2,207
64K rewrite
2,667
1M first
2,000
1M rewrite
2,783

1,362
1,641
1,778
2,370
1,730
2,560

1.27
1.18
1.24
1.13
1.16
1.09

Sequential Read (MiB/s)
4K
2,667
64K
3,048
1M
2,133

2,462
3,048
2,462

1.08
1.00
0.87

Random Read (MiB/s)
4K, 1 thread
1,730
4K, 4 threads
8,000
4K, 8 threads
15,564
64K, 4 threads
15,052

1,524
7,111
16,486
12,800

1.14
1.13
0.94
1.18

Random Write (MiB/s)
4K, 1 thread
1,255
4K, 4 threads
4,830

1,333
1,803

0.94
2.68

Multi-host writes
Shared cache
Lock-free writes

5.4

—
—
—

Performance Summary

Table 2 summarizes the results. DaxFS exceeds tmpfs
across all write workloads, including first writes. Under concurrency the gap widens: at 4 threads DaxFS
exceeds tmpfs by up to 2.68× on random writes.

Random I/O

5.5

Random reads. DaxFS outperforms tmpfs across all
thread counts. At 4 KB with 1 thread, DaxFS achieves
1.14× tmpfs. At 4 threads DaxFS maintains its lead
(1.13×). At 8 threads the gap narrows as both saturate
memory bandwidth (0.94×). At 64 KB with 4 threads,
DaxFS reaches 14.7 GiB/s versus tmpfs’s 12.5 GiB/s
(1.18×). The advantage comes from DaxFS’s lock-free
read path: the xarray is read-only after population (no
RCU grace periods or folio locks), allowing near-linear
scaling.
Random writes. DaxFS’s lock-free overlay provides
dramatic write scaling. At 4 KB with 4 threads, DaxFS
achieves 4,830 MiB/s versus tmpfs’s 1,803 MiB/s (2.68×).
tmpfs serialises on per-page locks and the global i pages
xarray lock during page fault handling; DaxFS writes
resolve to a direct store into a pre-allocated overlay page
with no locks on the data path.

GPU PCIe AtomicOp Evaluation

We evaluate the GPU coordination path on an NVIDIA
RTX 5090 connected via PCIe 5.0, with the DAX region
mapped into GPU address space via pinned host memory. Figure 6 presents the complete results across six
microbenchmarks.
Primitive latency (Figure 6, top-left). A volatile
PCIe read of commit seq costs 529 ns (one PCIe 5.0
round trip). A CAS inc/dec costs 1,811 ns (3.4× read),
reflecting memory-controller serialization. Lock acquire+release costs 2,048 ns.
Page cache lookup (Figure 6, top-center and bottomright). The fast path (a volatile read plus tag comparison) scales near-linearly to 8 threads (∼8 Mops/s), reaching 500+ Mops/s at 1,024 threads. Per-op latency drops
from 910 ns (1 thread) to under 2 ns (1,024 threads) as
the GPU’s warp scheduler amortizes PCIe latency across
concurrent outstanding requests.
7

Figure 2: Sequential read throughput comparison across
filesystems (Intel Xeon Gold 5418Y, DRAM-backed
DAX). Left: 16 MB sequential read; right: 1 MB sequential read. DaxFS achieves 59.2 MB/s on the large
sequential workload (6.2× ext4-dax) and matches tmpfs
on the 1 MB file (100 MB/s each). The 16 MB gap versus tmpfs (228.6 MB/s) reflects the overhead of per-page
overlay resolution on large sequential scans; at 1 MB the
overhead is amortized.

Figure 4: Metadata operation latency on 1,000 files
(lower is better). DaxFS achieves the lowest stat latency (3,528 ms), 4.6% faster than ext4-dax (3,699 ms)
and 6.3% faster than tmpfs (3,764 ms), due to flat overlay
lookup. On readdir, DaxFS (33.8 ms) is slower than
tmpfs (23.1 ms) and ext4-dax (23.9 ms) due to the cost
of iterating both the base image dirent array and the
overlay linked list.

design hypothesis: a filesystem whose coordination is
built entirely on cmpxchg extends naturally to GPU
threads via PCIe AtomicOps. The fast-path (cache hits)
requires zero atomics and scales to hundreds of millions
of operations per second. The slow-path (cache misses)
is intentionally serialized at the pending counter but
occurs only once per file page. Slot-level CAS transitions are bounded by PCIe AtomicOp bandwidth rather
than software overhead, confirming that DaxFS’s GPU
coordination adds no unnecessary abstraction layers.

Figure 3: Sequential read latency comparison (lower is
better). DaxFS completes a 16 MB read in 274.2 ms,
6.1× faster than ext4-dax (1,660.7 ms). On 1 MB files,
DaxFS and tmpfs finish in 18.0 and 17.7 ms respectively.

5.6

Slot CAS throughput (Figure 6, top-right). 64-bit
atomicCAS on independent slots scales to 11.7 Mops/s
at 512 threads, saturating the PCIe 5.0 AtomicOp bandwidth limit of ∼11.5 Mops/s. GPU-side slot transitions
are PCIe-bandwidth-limited, not software-limited.
Lock contention (Figure 6, bottom-left). Peracquisition time decreases with more threads (2,350 ns at
1 thread to 150 ns at 32) because the memory controller
pipelines back-to-back AtomicOp TLPs. The lock is
used only for rare global operations; the data path is
lock-free.
Page cache claim (Figure 6, bottom-center).
The cold-miss path (FREE→PENDING + pending
counter) achieves 0.23 Mops/s at 1 thread, dropping
to 0.005 Mops/s at 1,024 threads due to contention on
the global pending counter. This is by design: claims
are rare cold-miss events that signal the CPU to fill a
slot. In steady state, GPU threads hit the VALID fast
path at 500+ Mops/s.
Summary. The GPU evaluation validates DaxFS’s

End-to-End GPU Data Path Projection

To illustrate DaxFS’s GPU zero-copy path, we project
the cost of loading a 70B-parameter LLM (140 GB at
FP16). The conventional path (read() + cudaMemcpy)
performs two copies: kernel page cache to user buffer
(∼12 GB/s for large sequential reads) and user buffer
to GPU via PCIe 5.0 (∼50 GB/s unidirectional). With
DaxFS, the GPU would read directly from DAX memory
over PCIe, a single copy at PCIe bandwidth. For 140 GB
of VALID page cache data, the projected GPU path
would require 140 GB / 50 GB/s ≈ 2.8 s, whereas the
conventional two-copy path requires at least 140/12 +
140/50 ≈ 14.5 s (assuming no overlap). GPU-initiated
cache claims for cold pages add a one-time cost of at
most 140 GB / 4 KB × 4.4 µs ≈ 154 s, but this is a
worst-case serialized estimate; in practice, claims would
be pipelined across GPU threads and amortized by the
CPU’s backing-file fill rate.
8

6

Related Work

Persistent memory filesystems. PMFS [8],
NOVA [25], Strata [18], and SplitFS [17] target singlehost persistent memory. All maintain complex metadata
structures (B-trees, per-inode logs) that cannot be
shared across hosts without distributed locking. DaxFS
replaces these with a flat base image and lock-free hash
overlay.
CXL shared memory systems. Pond [19] and
TPP [21] focus on CXL memory management, not filesystem semantics. FamFS [12] is architecturally the closest
prior work to DaxFS. Both provide a filesystem interface to CXL shared memory, supporting multiple hosts
mounting the same DAX region. However, FamFS uses
a single-master log-replay model: one designated host
pre-allocates files and clients replay its metadata log.
Clients cannot create, append, truncate, or delete files,
and there is no shared cache or CXL-atomic coordination
(see Table 1 for a feature comparison).

Figure 5: Normalised performance summary across all
benchmarks (Intel Xeon Gold 5418Y, DRAM-backed
DAX). Each group is normalised to the best-performing
filesystem. DaxFS matches tmpfs on 1 MB sequential
reads and achieves the lowest stat latency, while outperforming ext4-dax on data I/O. The 16 MB sequential
read and readdir gaps versus tmpfs reflect per-page
overlay lookup and dual-source directory iteration overhead.

5.7

Multi-Host Evaluation

Distributed filesystems. GFS [11], CephFS [24],
Lustre [23], Orion [26], and Assise [1] use message-passing
or RPC, adding µs-scale latency that CXL shared memory makes unnecessary.

We evaluate multi-host CXL 3.0 coordination using a
modified QEMU 10.0 setup where two virtual hosts share
a memory region and CXL atomic requests are forwarded
between hosts via TCP. Figure 7 presents the results.

GPU storage and other related work. GPUDirect
Storage [10] and BaM [2] operate at the block layer;
DaxFS instead exports DAX memory via dma-buf for
P2P reads over PCIe. EROFS [9] and Slacker [13] focus
on read-only image distribution; neither supports multihost writes. DaxFS’s overlay draws on lock-free hash
table designs [14, 22] with lock-free free-list recycling via
cmpxchg.

CXL atomic throughput and latency. The singlethread throughput comparison (bottom-left, log scale)
shows the emulation overhead clearly: DRAM achieves
∼100 Mops/s while CXL atomics reach ∼1–3 Mops/s
(∼30–100× slower), reflecting the TCP forwarding cost.
With batching (batch 200), throughput improves by
amortizing per-operation network cost.
CAS accuracy. CAS success rate remains above 99%
across all thread counts (bottom-center), confirming that
DaxFS’s lock-free protocols function correctly under
cross-host contention. The slight accuracy drop at higher
thread counts reflects increased contention on shared
buckets, which triggers retries as designed.

7

Discussion and Limitations

Overlay insert scaling. Cross-host overlay insertions (bottom-right) achieve ∼20 inserts/s at 1 thread,
scaling to 2 threads. Concurrent inserts from both hosts
produce consistent overlay state with no lost updates.

Flat directory scalability. DaxFS’s flat directory
format performs a linear scan for lookup, which is O(n)
in directory size. For directories with more than ∼10K
entries, an overlay-indexed lookup would improve performance. For moderate directories (1K entries), the linear
scan is competitive with indexed approaches.

CXL/DRAM slowdown. The slowdown ratio (topright) ranges from ∼500× to ∼6,000× depending on
thread count and access pattern. This overhead is dominated by TCP forwarding latency in the QEMU emulation; hardware CXL 3.0 switches are expected to reduce
cross-host atomic latency to the µs range, which would
narrow this gap significantly.

Fixed overlay sizing. The overlay hash table size is
fixed at creation time. Dynamic resizing would require
a stop-the-world migration across all hosts. We recommend sizing the bucket count to maintain <70% load
factor: at 75% load, average probe length is 2.5; at 90%,
it is 5.5.
9

Figure 6: GPU PCIe AtomicOp coordination benchmarks on an RTX 5090 (PCIe 5.0, pinned host memory). Top
row: (left) single-thread primitive latency, (center) page cache lookup throughput vs. thread count, (right) slot CAS
throughput saturating the PCIe bandwidth limit. Bottom row: (left) coordination lock contention, (center) page
cache claim throughput (cold-miss path), (right) per-op lookup latency.
Persistence guarantees. DaxFS currently relies on
ADR (Asynchronous DRAM Refresh) or eADR for persistence. It does not issue explicit clflush/clwb instructions. On platforms without ADR, a crash could
lose recent overlay insertions. Adding explicit cache-line
flushes is straightforward but adds latency.

tributes. File names are limited to 255 characters. These
restrictions reflect the target workloads (container rootfs,
shared caching) where these features are rarely needed.

8

Conclusion

CXL shared memory enables a new filesystem design
point: multiple hosts sharing a single namespace and
cache through coherent load/store operations, with no
network protocol overhead. DaxFS exploits this by using cmpxchg as its sole coordination primitive, achieving
lock-free concurrent writes, cooperative caching with
decentralized MH-clock eviction, and zero-copy access
in a unified design.
We validate multi-host correctness using QEMUemulated CXL 3.0, confirming >99% CAS accuracy
under cross-host contention with no lost updates. On
single-host DRAM-backed DAX, DaxFS exceeds tmpfs
throughput across all write workloads, achieving up to
2.68× higher random write throughput with 4 threads
and 1.18× higher random read throughput at 64 KB.
Preliminary GPU microbenchmarks further confirm that

Pool recycling. The overlay pool uses per-type lockfree free lists for recycling deleted entries, but the pool
itself is not compacted. Long-running workloads with
heavy churn may fragment the pool. Online compaction
is possible future work.
GPU access scope. The current GPU integration
supports read-only access via dma-buf. GPU-initiated
writes are architecturally possible but are not yet implemented, as the primary use case of model and dataset
loading is read-dominated.
POSIX compliance gaps. DaxFS does not support
mknod (device nodes, FIFOs, sockets) or extended at10

A. Singhania. The multikernel: A new OS architecture for scalable multicore systems. In ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP),
pages 29–44, 2009.
[4] CXLMemUring.
Modified NVIDIA open
GPU kernel modules with CXL P2PDMA
support.
https://github.com/CXLMemUring/
open-gpu-kernel-modules, 2026.
[5] F. J. Corbató. A paging experiment with the Multics
system. In MIT Project MAC Report MAC-M-384,
1968.
[6] CXL Consortium. Compute Express Link (CXL)
specification, revision 3.0, 2022.

Figure 7: Multi-host CXL 3.0 benchmark dashboard
(QEMU emulation, two hosts, TCP-forwarded CXL
atomics). Top row: CXL atomic throughput, latency,
and CXL/DRAM slowdown ratio vs. thread count. Bottom row: single-thread throughput comparison (log
scale), CAS accuracy under contention, and overlay insert throughput.

[7] DAXFS. DAXFS: A lock-free shared filesystem
for CXL disaggregated memory. https://github.
com/multikernel/daxfs.
[8] S. R. Dulloor, S. Kumar, A. Keshavamurthy,
P. Lantz, D. Reddy, R. Sankaran, and J. Jackson. System software for persistent memory. In
ACM European Conference on Computer Systems
(EuroSys), pages 15:1–15:15, 2014.

the cmpxchg-based design extends to GPU threads at
PCIe 5.0 bandwidth limits. As CXL 3.0 hardware matures, DaxFS provides a ready filesystem layer for disaggregated memory pools shared across hosts.

[9] X. Gao, M. Dong, S. Miao, W. Du, C. Yu, and
H. Chen. EROFS: A compression-friendly readonly
file system for resource-scarce devices. In USENIX
Annual Technical Conference (ATC), pages 149–162,
2019.

Availability

[10] NVIDIA Corporation. GPUDirect Storage: A direct data path between local or remote storage
and GPU memory. NVIDIA Developer Documentation, 2023. https://developer.nvidia.com/
gpudirect-storage.

DaxFS is available as open-source software [7]. The implementation includes the Linux kernel module, mkdaxfs
image creation tool, and daxfs-inspect debugging tool.

References

[11] S. Ghemawat, H. Gobioff, and S.-T. Leung. The
Google file system. In ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP), pages 29–43,
2003.

[1] T. E. Anderson, M. Canini, J. Kim, D. Kostic,
Y. Kwon, S. Peter, W. Pugh, and E. Witchel. Assise:
Performance and availability via client-local NVM
in a distributed file system. In USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI), 2020.

[12] J. Groves. Introduce the Famfs shared-memory file
system. Linux kernel patch series (RFC v2), April
2024. https://lwn.net/Articles/983105/.

[2] Z. Qureshi, V. Mailthody, I. S. Gelado, S. Min,
A. Masood, J. Park, J. Xiong, C. J. Newburn,
D. Vetter, and W.-m. W. Hwu. GPU-initiated
on-demand high-throughput storage access in the
BaM system architecture. In ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS),
2023.

[13] T. Harter, B. Salmon, R. Liu, A. C. Arpaci-Dusseau,
and R. H. Arpaci-Dusseau. Slacker: Fast distribution with lazy Docker containers. In USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST),
pages 181–195, 2016.
[14] M. Herlihy and N. Shavit. The Art of Multiprocessor
Programming. Morgan Kaufmann, 2008.

[3] A. Baumann, P. Barham, P.-E. Dagand, T. Harris,
R. Isaacs, S. Peter, T. Roscoe, A. Schüpbach, and

[15] Intel Corporation. Intel Optane DC persistent memory. Intel Technology Brief, 2019.
11

[16] J. Izraelevitz, J. Yang, L. Zhang, J. Kim, X. Liu,
A. Memaripour, Y. J. Soh, Z. Wang, Y. Xu, S. R.
Dulloor, J. Zhao, and S. Swanson. Basic performance measurements of the Intel Optane DC persistent memory module. arXiv:1903.05714, 2019.

[26] J. Yang, J. Kim, M. Hoseinzadeh, J. Izraelevitz, and
S. Swanson. Orion: A distributed file system for
non-volatile main memory and RDMA-capable networks. In USENIX Conference on File and Storage
Technologies (FAST), pages 221–234, 2019.

[17] R. Kadekodi, S. K. Lee, S. Kashyap, T. Kim,
A. Kolli, and V. Chidambaram. SplitFS: Reducing software overhead in file systems for persistent
memory. In ACM Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles (SOSP), pages 494–508, 2019.
[18] Y. Kwon, H. Fingler, T. Hunt, S. Peter, E. Witchel,
and T. Anderson. Strata: A cross media file system. In ACM Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles (SOSP), pages 460–477, 2017.
[19] H. Li, D. S. Berger, L. Hsu, D. Ernst, P. Zardoshti, S. Novakovic, M. Shah, S. Rajadnya, S. Lee,
I. Agarwal, M. D. Hill, M. Fontoura, and R. Bianchini. Pond: CXL-based memory pooling systems
for cloud platforms. In ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), 2023.
[20] Linux Kernel Documentation.
Direct access
for files (DAX). https://www.kernel.org/doc/
Documentation/filesystems/dax.txt.
[21] H. Al Maruf, H. Wang, A. Dhanotia, J. Weiner,
N. Agarwal, P. Bhatt, J. Chow, and M. Russinovich. TPP: Transparent page placement for CXLenabled tiered-memory. In ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), 2023.
[22] M. M. Michael. High performance dynamic lock-free
hash tables and list-based sets. In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures
(SPAA), 2002.
[23] P. Schwan. Lustre: Building a file system for 1000node clusters. In Proceedings of the Linux Symposium, 2003.
[24] S. A. Weil, S. A. Brandt, E. L. Miller, D. D. E.
Long, and C. Maltzahn. Ceph: A scalable, highperformance distributed file system. In USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), 2006.
[25] J. Xu and S. Swanson. NOVA: A log-structured
file system for hybrid volatile/non-volatile main
memories. In USENIX Conference on File and
Storage Technologies (FAST), pages 323–338, 2016.
12

